PROPERTY  OF: 
DAVID  0.  McKAY  LIBRARY 

BYU-IDAHO 
REXBURG  ID  83460-0405 


DAVID  O.  MCKAY  LIBRARY 


31404  007861492 


DATE  DUE 


\V>IAM  1  S  2006 


1& 


- 


- 


OCT  2  4  2009 


2010 
FZDt3" 


Demco 


TRANSLATIONS   OF   EARLY    DOCUMENTS 

SERIES   I 

PALESTINIAN    JEWISH    TEXTS 
(PRE-RABB1NIC) 


THE    BOOK   OF   JUBILEES 

OR 

THE    LITTLE   GENESIS 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/bookofjubileesor01char 


THE 

BOOK  OF  JUBILEES 

OR 

THE   LITTLE   GENESIS 


TRANSLATED   FROM   THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT 

BY 

R.    H.   CHARLES,   D.Litt.,   D.D. 

CANON   OF    WEST  MINSTER  J   FELLOW  OF   MERTON   COLLEGE  ; 
FELLOW  OF   THE   BRITISH   ACADEMY 


WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION'    BY 

G.  H.  BOX,  M.A. 

lecturer  in  rabbinical  Hebrew,  king's  college,  London 
hon.  canon  of  st.  albans 


SOCIETY    FOR    PROMOTING 
CHRIST  I,  AN     KNOWLEDGE 

LONDON:    68,     HAYMARKET,    S.W.   I. 
NEW   YORK:   THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

1917 


EDITORS'    PREFACE 


The  object  of  this  series  of  translations  is  primarily 
to  furnish  students  with  short,  cheap,  and  handy 
text-books,  which,  it  is  hoped,  will  facilitate  the 
study  of  the  particular  texts  in  class  under  com- 
petent teachers.  But  it  is  also  hoped  that  the 
volumes  will  be  acceptable  to  the  general  reader 
who  may  be  interested  in  the  subjects  with  which 
they  deal.  It  has  been  thought  advisable,  as  a 
general  rule,  to  restrict  the  notes  and  comments  to 
a  small  compass;  more  especially  as,  in  most  cases, 
excellent  works  of  a  more  elaborate  character  are 
available.  Indeed,  it  is  much  to  be  desired  that 
these  translations  may  have  the  effect  of  inducing 
readers  to  study  the  larger  works. 

Our  principal  aim,  in  a  word,  is  to  make  some 
difficult  texts,  important  for  the  study  of  Christian 
origins,  more  generally  accessible  in  faithful  and 
scholarly  translations. 

In  most  cases  these  texts  are  not  available  in  a 
cheap  and  handy  form.  In  one  or  two  cases  texts 
have  been  included  of  books  which  are  available 
in  the  official  Apocrypha;  but  in  every  such  case 
reasons  exist  for  putting  forth  these  texts  in  a  new 
translation,  with  an  Introduction,  in  this  series. 

We  desire  to  express  our  thanks  to  Canon  Charles 
and  Messrs.  A.  and  C.  Black,  for  their  permission  to 
reprint  here  the  translation  of  The  Hook  of  Jubilees, 
published  in  1902. 

W.  0.  E.  Oesterley. 
G.  II    Box. 


INTRODUCTION 


Short  Account  of  the  Book 

The  Book  of  Jubilees,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called, 
"  the   little   Genesis,"    purports   to   be   a   revelation 
given  by  God  to  Moses  through  the  medium  of  an 
angel  ("  the  Angel  of  the  Presence,"  i.  27),  and  con- 
taining a  history,  divided  up  into  jubilee-periods  of 
forty-nine  years,  from  the  creation  to  the  coming  of 
Moses.     Though   the   actual   narrative   of  events   is 
only  carried  down  to  the  birth  and  early  career  of 
Moses,  its  author  envisages  the  events  of  a  later  time, 
and  in  particular  certain  events  of  special  interest 
at  the  time  when  he  wrote,  which  was  probably  in  the 
latter  years  of  the  second  century  B.C.,  perhaps  in  the 
reign_  of     the    Maccabean    prince    John    Hyrcanus. 
Though  "distinguished   from  the   Pentateuch   proper 
("  the  first  Law,"  vi.  22),  it  presupposes  and  supple- 
ments  the   latter.     The   actual   narrative   embraces 
material  contained  in  the  whole  of  Genesis  and  part 
of   Exodus.     But   the   legal   regulations   given    pre- 
suppose  other   parts  of  the    Pentateuch,   especially 
the  so-called  "  Priest's  Code  "  (P),  and  certain  details 
in  the  narrative  are  probably  intended  to  apply  to 
events  that  occurred  in  the  author's  own  time  (the 
latter  years  of  the  second  century  B.C.).     The  author 
himself    seems    to    have    contemplated    the    speedy 
inauguration  of  the  Messianic  Age,  and  in  this  respect 
his  point  of  view  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Apocalyptic 
writers.     But  his  work,  though  it  contains  one  or  two 
passages  of  an  apocalyptic  character,  4s  quite  unlike 
the    typical    apocalypses.     It    is    largely    narrative 
based  upon  the  historical  narratives  in  Genesis  and 

vii 


viii  INTRODUCTION 

Exodus,  interspersed  with  legends,  and  emphasizing 
certain  legal  practices  (such  as  the  strict  observance 
of  the  Sabbath,  circumcision,  etc.),  and  laying  much 
stress  upon  their  eternal  obligation.  But  his  main 
object  was  to  inculcate  a  reform  in  the  regulation  of 
the  calendar  and  festivals,  in  place  of  the  intercalated 
lunar  calendar,  which  he  condemns  in  the  strongest 
language.  He  proposes  to  substitute  for  this  a  solar 
calendar  consisting  of  12  months  and  containing 
364  days.  The  result  of  such  a  system  is  to  make 
all  festivals,  except  the  Day  of  Atonement,  fall  on 
a  Sunday ;  the  author  also  fixes  the  date  of  the  Feast 
of  Weeks  (Pentecost)  on  Sivan  15th  (in  place  of  the 
traditional  Sivan  6th).  He  obviously  believes  that 
the  prevailing  system  has  produced  grave  conse- 
quences in  religious  practice.  The  proper  observance 
of  the  feasts,  which  had  been  prescribed  by  divine 
authority,  is,  according  to  his  view,  rendered  im- 
possible so  long  as  the  right  principles  for  regulating 
the  calendar  are  ignored.  These  principles  are 
justified  from  the  written  Law,  and  are  represented 
as  having  been  ordained  in  heaven.  To  what  party 
or  tendency  in  Judaism  did  the  *  author  belong  ? 
Various  answers  have  been  given  to  this  question, 
which  will  be  fully  discussed  below.  It  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  believe,  as  Dr.  Charles  contends,  that  the 
author  was  a  Pharisee,  for  the  positions  he  advocates 
are  in  many  respects  fundamentally  opposed  to  later 
Pharisaic  practice.  In  particular,  how  can  any  mem- 
ber of  the  Pharisaic  party,  which  from  its  beginning 
championed  popular  religious  custom,  have  advocated 
a  solar, calendar  ?  More  can  be  said  for  the  view  that 
the  author  Was  a  member  of  the  Hasidim  or  "  pious  " 
(who  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Pharisees), 
while  in  a  recent  important  discussion  Leszynsky 
has  made  out  a  strong,  if  not  quite  convincing,  case 
for  Sadducean  authorship.  The  Book  has  sometimes 
been  styled  a  Midrash,  but  such  a  descriptive  term 
needs  some  qualification.  It  claims  to  be  a  revela- 
tion,  and   not   a   mere   exposition   of   Genesis   and 


INTRODUCTION  ix 

Exodus.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  certain  Mid- 
rashic  tendency  observable  in  the  way  the  author 
rewrites  the  older  narratives,  which  reminds  one  of 
the  work  of  the  Chronicler  as  compared  with  the 
earlier  canonical  books  which  he  remodelled.  But 
Jubilees  is  not  at  all  like  the  typical  Midrash  of  the 
later  Rabbinical  period ;  it  is  more  independent,  and 
resembles  rather  such  works  as  the  "  Chronicles  of 
Jerahmeel,"  or  the  earlier   (narrative)   part  of  the 

Apocalypse  of  Abraham." 

The  Book,  which  was  probably  composed  in 
Hebrew,  is  divided  into  fifty  chapters,  and  appears 
to  be  complete. 

Titles 

The  Book  was  known  under  various  titles,  most  of 
them  in  Greek  as  referred  to  in  later. Greek  writers. 
The  most  important  are  "  Jubilees  "  (=  ra  'Iw/fyAcua 
or  ol  'Iw/fyXatoi)  and  "  the  little  Genesis  "  (=4  ktnrrj 
rfaais  and  variants).  Both  of  these  seem  to  go 
back  to  Hebrew  originals,  and  there  would  thus 
appear  to  have  been  two  authoritative  Hebrew 
titles  of  the  original  Hebrew  work,  viz.  ha-ydbeltm 
(or  sefer  hd-ydbeldlh),  and  Bereshith  zutd.  In  the 
latter  the  epithet  "  little  "  l  refers  not  to  the  extent 
of  the  work,  but  to  its  relatively  inferior  position  as 
compared  with  the  canonical  Genesis.  It  is  also 
noteworthy  that  a  clear  reference  to  our  Book  is 
made  in  the  recently  recovered  fragments  of  a 
11  Zadokite  Work."  2  The  passage  runs  as  follows 
(xx.  i)  : 

And  as  for  the  exact  statement  of  their  periods  to  put 
Israel  in  remembrance  in  regard  to  all  these,  behold  it 
is  treated  accurately  in  the  Book  of  the  Divisions  of  the 
Seasons  according  to  their  Jubilees  and  their  Weeks. 

This  is  remarkably  like  the  opening  words  of  the 
Prologue  of  our  Book :  This  is  the  history  of  the  division 

1  Applied   p.lso    to  ^certain    minor   midrashlm    ("  midrash 
ratt,"  etc.). 
■  First  published  by  Schechter  in  iqio  (Cambridge  Press). 


x  INTRODUCTION 

of  the  days  .  .  .  of  the  events  of  the  years  according 
to  their  (year-)  weeks,  according  to  their  jubilees.  .  .  . 
Cf.  also  the  colophon  at  the  end  of  the  Book  : 

Herewith  is  completed  the  account  of  the  division  of 
the  days. 

Other 'titles  of  our  Book  are  :  The>  Atocalypse  of 
Moses  (Syncellus) ;  The  Testament  df  Moses  (the  Catena 
of  Nicephonis) ;  The  Book  of  Adam's  'Daughters 
(perhaps  applied  only  to  a  portion  of  fubilees) ;  The 
Life  of  Adam  (perhaps  an  amplified  excerpt  of  oar 
Book). 

Versions  and  Original  Language 

The  complete  text  of  the  Book  is  extant  in  an 
Ethiopic  Version,  which  is  also  the  most  accurate 
that  has  survived.  Four  MSS.  of  it  are  known,  and 
are  preserved  in  European  Libraries,  the  two  most 
important  in  the  National  Library  in  Paris  and  in 
the  British  Museum  respectively.  A  critical  edition 
of  the  text,  based  on  all  the  known  MSS.,  has  been 
published  by  Dr.  Charles  (Oxford,  1895),  which  was 
preceded  by  an  important  one  by  Dillmann  (published 
1859).  Fragments  of  a  Greek,  Latin  and  (possibly) 
a  Syriac  version  are  also  extant.  The  fragments  of 
the  Greek  version  are  contained  in  numerous  citations 
in  Justin  Martyr,  Origen,  Diodorus  of  Antioch, 
Isidore  of  Alexandria,  Epiphanius,  Syncellus  and 
other  writers.  The  Latin  version,  of  which  about 
one-fourth  has  been  preserved,  is  very  valuable  for 
the  criticism  of  the  text.  The  fragments  that  have 
survived  were  first  published  by  Ceriani  (in  his 
Monumenta  Sacra  et  Prof  ana,  1861),  and  have  been 
edited  by  Ronsch  (1874),  and  more  recently  by 
Charles  (in  his  edition  of  the  Ethiopic  text  referred  to 
above).  What  may  possibly  be  a  fragment  of  a 
Syriac  Version  of  our  Book  is  contained  in  a  British 
Museum  MS.  (Add!  12154,  fol.  180)  entitled  "  Names 
of  the  Wives  of  the  Patriarchs  according  to  the 
Hebrew  Book  called  Jubilees."     But  whether  this 


INTRODUCTION  xi 

is  really  part  of  a  complete  version  is  very  doubtful 
(see  Charles,  op.  cit.t  Appendix  iii.). 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  both  the  Ethiopic  and 
Latin  versions  were  translated  from  the  Greek 
which,  it  may  be  inferred  from  the  large  number  of 
quotations  scattered  about  in  different  writers  over 
a  wide  period,  must  have  been  widely  diffused.  The 
fact  that  a  Greek  text  underlies  these  versions  is 
clear  from  such  phenomena  as  the  presence,  in  the 
Ethiopic,  of  transliterations  of  Greek  words  (e.  g. 
rjXiov,  "of  the  sun,"  in  xxxiv.  n) ;  proper  names  are 
transliterated  as  they  appear  in  Greek,  not  in  Hebrew ; 
and  certain  textual  corruptions  can  only  be  explained 
by  reference  to  an  underlying  Greek  text.  Similar 
phenomena  characterize  the  Latin  version.  Thus  in 
xxxviii.  12,  "  timoris  "  =  SuAm?,  which  is  corrupt 
for  SovAcms ;  and  sometimes  the  Greek  has  been  mis- 
understood, as  e.  g.  in  xxxviii.  13,  "  honorem  "=rtfirjv, 
which  should  have  been  rendered  by  "  tributum." 

It  is  more  difficult  to  determine  whether  a  Semitic 
original  underlies  the  Greek,  and,  if  that  be  the  case, 
whether  the  original  Semitic  text  was  Hebrew  or 
Aramaic.  It  must  be  admitted  that  in  a  number 
of  passages  where  the  text  of  the  canonical  Genesis 
is  cited  the  Ethiopic  agrees  with  the  LXX  against 
all  other  authorities  (see  Charles'  Jubilees,  p.  xxxiv). 
But  these  cases  are  not,  on  the  whole,  either  numerous 
or  important.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  Ethiopic 
often  agrees  with  the  LXX,  supported  by  other 
authorities  (especially  the  Samaritan  text  and  version) 
against  the  Masoretic  Hebrew  text,  and  there  are 
other  variations  in  the  textual  phenomena.  From  a 
survey  of  these  phenomena  Charles  deduces  the 
conclusion,  no  doubt  rightly,  that  "  our  book  attests 
an  independent  form  of  the  Hebrew  text  of  the 
Pentateuch.  .  .  .  Our  book  represents  some  form 
of  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Pentateuch  midway  between 
the  forms  presupposed  by  the  LXX  and  the  Syriac."  2 

1  They  may  be  due  to  assimilation  in  the  Greek  Version 
with  the  LXX.  2  Jubilees,  p.  xxxviii. 


xii  INTRODUCTION 

It  agrees  with  the  LXX,  or  with  combinations  into 
which  the  LXX  enters,  more  often  than  with  any 
other  authority  or  group  of  authorities.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  often  independent  of  the  LXX,  and 
in  a  considerable  number  of  cases  attests  readings, 
with  the  support  of  MT  and  Sam.,  agajnst  the  LXX, 
and  manifestly  superior  to  the  latter.'  'It  is  note- 
worthy that  it  never  agrees  with  M  against  all  the 
other  authorities.  These  phenomena  suggest  that 
the  composition  of  Jubilees  is  to  be  assigned  to 
"  some  period  between  250  B.C.  (LXX  version  of  the 
Pentateuch)  and  a.d.  100  [when  M  was  finally  fixed], 
and  at  a  time  nearer  the  earlier  date  than  the  latter."  l 
A  number  of  considerations  may  be  adduced  which 
suggest  that  the  original  language  of  Jubilees  was 
Hebrew.  Thus  mistranslations  of  Hebrew  words 
occur,  e.  g.  in  xliii.  11,  the  word  rendered  (as  cor- 
rected) "  I  pray  thee,"  is,  in  the  Ethiopic,  "  in  me  " — 
a  confusion  of  the  Hebrew  bi  =  Scofuzt  (Gen.  xliv.  18) 
with  the  Hebrew  word  (spelt  in  exactly  the  same  way) 
which  =  "in  me;"  there  are  also  numerous 
Hebraisms  surviving  in  the  Ethiopic  and  Latin 
versions,2  as  well  as  paronomasiae  based  upon  Hebrew 
words.8  It  is  noteworthy,  also,  that  the  author  lays 
special  stress  upon  the  sacred  character  of  Hebrew, 
which  was  originally  the  language  of  creation  (cf. 
xii.  25-26;  xliii.  15).  Moreover,  he  represents  his 
work  as  having  emanated  from  Moses,  and  a  genuinely 
Mosaic  work  would  naturally  be  written  in  Hebrew. 
Finally,  certain  parts  of  Jubilees,  or  of  something 
remarkably  like  Jubilees,  have  survived  in  Hebrew 
form  in  certain  Hebrew  books,  especially  the  Chronicles 
of  Jerahmeel,  and  the  Midrash  Tadshe.  It  is  not 
improbable,  also,  that  a  Hebrew  form  of  Jubilees  was 
known  to  the  compiler  of  the  Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  (see 
Friedlander's  Introduction  to  the  latter  book,  p.  xxii). 
The   only  ground   for  suggesting  that   the   Semitic 

1  Ob.  (.it.,  p.  xxxix. 

1  Cf.  6.  g.  xxii.  10,  "  eligere  in  te  "  =  Heb.  bdbar  be. 

3  See  Charles,  op.  cit.,  p.  xxxiii  for  details. 


INTRODUCTION  xiii 

original  may  have  been  Aramaic  rather  than  Hebrew 
is  the  presence  of  certain  Aramaizing  forms  of  proper 
names  (e.  g.  Filistin,  with  the  termination  n  instead 
of  m)  in  the  Latin  version.  But  in  all  these  cases 
the  Ethiopic  transliteration  has  m  (not  n),  and  it 
seems  probable  that  the  Aramaizing  forms  in  these 
cases  are  due  to  the  Latin  translator,  who  there  is 
other  ground  for  supposing  was  a  Palestinian  Jew. 
We  may,  therefore,  safely  conclude  that  the  original 
language  of  our  Book  was  Hebrew. 

Affinities  with  other  Literature 

Though  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  essential 
unity  of  our  Book  (that  is  to  say,  that  it  was  composed 
and  written  in  its  present  form  by  one  author),  it  is 
equally  clear  that  this  writer  incorporated  earlier 
traditions  and  legends  into  his  work.  Thus  he  refers 
explicitly  to  Noachic  writings  (xxi.  10;  cf.  x.  13), 
and  has  apparently  incorporated  two  considerable 
sections  of  a  "  Book  of  Noah  "  in  vii.  20-39  anc^  x- 
1-15.  It  is  well-known  that  this  Noachic  Book  was 
also  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Book  of  Enoch,  1  Enoch, 
vi.-xi.,  lx.,  lxv.-lxix.  25,  and  cvi.-cvii.  being  probably 
derived  from  it.  There  is  reason,  also,  to  believe  that 
the  author  of  Jubilees  was  acquainted  with  some  form 
of  the  Book  of  Enoch  (1  Enoch).  According  to 
Charles  the  parts  of  1  Enoch  with  which  our  author 
was  acquainted  are  1  Enoch  vi.-xvi.,  xxiii.-xxxvi. 
and  lxxii.-xc.  He  seems  clearly  to  refer  to  the  last 
section  in  iv.  17  : 

And  he  [Enoch]  was  the  first  among  men  that  are  born 
on  earth  who  learnt  writing  and  knowledge  and  wisdom 
and  who  wrote  down  the  signs  of  heaven  according  to 
the  order  of  their  months  in  a  book,  that  men  might 
know  the  seasons  of  Hie  years  according  to  the  order  of 
their  separate  months. 

Here  the  Enoch-book  referred  to  forms  a  description 
of  1  Enoch'  lxxii.-lxxxii.  ("  the  Book  of  the  courses 
of   the  Heavenly  Luminaries  "),  while  iv.  19   [And 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 

what  was  and  what  will  be  he  saw  in  a  vision  of  his 
sleep,  as  it  will  happen  to  the  children  of  men  throughout 
their  generations  until  the  day  of  judgement ;  he  saw 
and  understood  everything,  and  wrote  his  testimony, 
and  placed  the  testimony  on  earth  for  all  the  children 
of  men  and  for  their  generations)  forms  an  exact  descrip- 
tion of  the  "  Dream-Visions  "  in  I  Enoch  lxxxiii.-xc.1 
There  are  also  a  number  of  parallels  with  the  Testa- 
ments of  the  XII  Patriarchs,  but  these  are  not  sufficient 
to  show  dependence  on  either  side;  the  phenomena 
rather  suggest  that  both  writers  are  using  common 
sources:  ct.  xxviii.  9;  xxx.  2-6,  18,  25;  xxxi.  3-4, 
13,  15,  16;  xxxii.  1,  8;  xxxiii.  1,  2,  4;  xxxiv.  1-9; 
xxxvii.-xxxviii. ;  xli.  8-14,  24-25;  xlvi.  6-9. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  a  knowledge  of 
our  Book  seems  to  be  presupposed  in  some  of  the 
later  Jewish  literature.  Thus  the  Chronicles  of 
Jerahmeel,  a  late  compilation  written  in  Hebrew, 
contains  much  material,  common  to  Jubilees ;  at 
times  it  reproduces  the  actual  words  of  the  text  of 
the  latter.  Another  late  Jewish  work,  the  Midrash 
Tadshe,  contains  passages  which  are  largely  identical 
with  portions  of  the  text  of  our  Book.  This  Midrash 
was  compiled  in  its  present  form  by  Moses  ha- 
Darshan  in  the  eleventh  century  a.d.,  but  is  based 
upon  a  much  earlier  work  by  R.  Pinchas  b.  Jair 
(end  of  second  century,  a.d.),  who  utilized  materials 
from  our  Book.  Besides  the  above,  our  Book  appears 
to  have  been  known  to  the  compiler  of  the  Samaritan 
Chronicle  (twelfth  century,  a.d.),  and  also  to  the 
compiler  of  the  Pirke  de  K.  Eliezer  (finally  redacted 
in  the  ninth  century  a.d.).  In  fact,  in  both  cases 
there  is  implicit  a  certain  amount  of  polemic  (espe- 
cially in  calendar-matters)  against  the  positions 
advocated  in  Jubilees.  But  besides  this,  there  is  a 
remarkable  parallelism  in  subject-matter  between 
our  Book  and  the  Pirke  de  K.  Eliezer,  to  which 
Friedlander  calls  attention.  He  points  out  that 
both  "  are  alike  in  being  practically  Midrashic  para- 
1  For  further  parallels  see  Charles,  Jubilees,  pp.  lxviii  ft. 


INTRODUCTION  xv 

phrases  and  expansions  of  the  narratives  contained 
in  the  Book  of  Genesis  and  part  of  the  Book  of 
Exodus.  .  .  .  Both  books  deal  with  the  Calendar  .  .  . 
and  in  this  respect  they  recall  the  Books  of  Enoch." 
Both  "  have  chapters  setting  forth  the  story  of  the 
Creation  (Mdaseh  Bereshith).  .  .  .  The  past  is  re- 
called and  the  future  revealed.  The  nature  of  God, 
angels  and  man  is  unfolded.  We  read  of  sin  and  grace, 
repentance  and  atonement,  good  and  evil,  life  and 
death,  Paradise  and  Gehenna,  Satan  and  Messiah."  l 
Numerous  references  to  Jubilees  occur  in  Christian 
literature  (patristic  period  and  later),  where  long 
extracts  from  the  Book  are  often  cited,  and  by  name. 
These  have  been  collected  by  Charles  (op.  cit., 
pp.  lxxvii  ff.),  who  also  cites  a  number  of  parallels 
oetween  our  Book  and  the  New  Testament.  But 
these  are  somewhat  vague,  and  are  hardly  sufficient 
to  establish  any  real  or  direct  connexion. 

The  Special  Aims  and  General  Character  of  the 

Book 

It  is  obvious  that  Jubilees  is  dominated  by  certain 
interests  and  antipathies.  It  is  to  a  large  extent 
polemical  in  character,  and  its  author  desires  at  once 
to  protest  against  certain  tendencies  which,  in  his 
view,  threaten  true  religion,  and  to  inculcate  certain 
reforms.  Incidentally  it  commends  certain  religious 
practices,  and  endeavours  to  invest  them  with  en- 
hanced sanctions.  In  the  forefront,  as  its  name  ("  the 
Book  of  Jubilees  ")  suggests,2  stands  the  question 
of  the  Calendar.  It  is  all  important  in  the  author's 
view  that  the  divinely  ordained  principle  according 
to  which  history  is  divided  up  by  year-weeks  (t.  e. 
periods  of  7  years)  and  Jubilees  (i.  e.  periods  of 
7x7  years)  is  recognized  (cf.  i.  26  f.).  Accordingly, 
he  gives  a  history  from  Creation  to  Moses,  in  which 
the  sequence  of  events  is  recorded  and  dated  exactly 

1  Op.  cit.,\p\  xafii,.      y 

1  This  is  obscured  by  such  titles  as  "  the  little  Genesis," 
"  the  Apocalypse  of  Moses,"  etc. 


xvi  INTRODUCTION 

by  jubilee-periods,  or  portions  of  such.  This  leads 
up  to  a  final  section  in  which  the  law  respecting 
jubilees  and  sabbatical  years  is  solemnly  enjoined. 
The  writer's  aim  seems  to  have  been  nothing  less  than 
a  reformation  of  the  Jewish.  Calendar.  The  pre- 
vailing system  has  led  to  the  nation ,"  forgetting  " 
new  moons,  festivals,  and  sabbaths '(and  ( ?)  jubilees) ;  * 
in  other  words,  it  has  produced  grave  irregularities 
in  the  observance  of  matters  which  were  of  divine 
obligation. 

A  cardinal  feature  of  the  writer's  system  is  the 
jubilee-period,  which  consists  of  7  X  7  (1.  e.  49)  years. 
Here  we  are  confronted  with  a  difficulty.  The 
passage  in  Lev.  (xxv.  8-14)  which  ordains  the  observ- 
ance of  the  jubilee-year  expressly  identifies  this,  in 
the  present  form  of  the  text,  with  the  fiftieth  year 
(Lev.  xxv.  10  and  n).  But  it  is  incredible  that  the 
author  of  our  Book  would  deliberately  have  violated 
the  express  injunctions  of  the  Pentateuch  on  such  a 
matter,  and  we  are  driven  to  conclude  that  he  had 
a  text  before  him  in  which  the  word  "  fiftieth  "  was 
absent.2  The  wording  of  verses  8  and  9  is  ambiguous, 
and  allows  of  the  explanation  that  the  jubilee-year  was 
the  forty-ninth  and  not  the  fiftieth.  It  is  quite  possible 
that  in  verses  10  and  n  "  fiftieth  "  has  been  addeo)  to 
the  text,  in  the  interests  of  the  rival  explanation  that 
ultimately  prevailed,  for,  as  has  been  pointed  out 
already,  our  Book  presupposes  a  text  of  the  Penta- 
teuch that  is  independent  of  and  earlier  than  M.T. 
This  explanation  suffers  from  the  difficulty  that  the 
LXX-  and  other  ancient  versions  (including  the 
Samaritan  text)  support  the  currently  received 
reading.  But  it  is  not  improbable  that  on  sucji  a 
matter  the  influence  of  orthodox  views  may  have 
operated  to  bring  their  text  of  the  verses  into  harmony 
with  the  currently  accepted  theory.8 

1  vi.  34;  cf.  i.  10. 

1  So  Leszvnsky,  Die  Sadduzaer,  pp.  156  ff. 

•  It  should  be  noted  that  the  Talmud  (T.B.,  Ned  ,  61a) 
refers  to  the  view  (held  by  R.  Jehuda)  that  the  jubilee-period 
was  forty-nine  years. 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 

But  more  revolutionary  is  the  writer's  advocacy 
of  a  solar  calendar.  In  ii.  9  he  says,  "  God  appointed 
the  sun  to  be  a  great  sign  upon  the  earth  for  days 
and  for  sabbaths,  and  for  feasts  and  for  years  and  for 
jubilees  and  for  all  seasons  of  the  years."  In  Gen.  i. 
14  this  function  is  assigned  to  the  sun  and  the  moon  ; 
but  in  our  Book  the  moon  is  deliberately  excluded. 
The  writer  objected  fiercely  to  the  traditional  calendar 
which  was  based  upon  the  changes  of  the  moon,  and 
was  adjusted  to  the  solar  year  by  means  of  inter- 
calation. How  can  his  apparent  violation  of  the 
express  wording  of  Scripture  be  explained?  His 
answer  would  probably  have  been  that  the  solar 
year  of  364  days  (cf.  vi.  32)  was  actually  the  system 
implied  in  the  Pentateuch.  It  has  been  pointed  out 
by  Bacon  1  that  in  the  P  sections  of  the  Flood- 
narrative  in  Genesis  a  year  of  364  days  is  pre-supposed. 
It  is  said  that  the  Flood  began  on  the  17th  day  of  the 
second  month,  and  ended  on  the  27th  day  of  the 
second  month  the  following  year,  i.  e.  reckoning  by  the 
ordinary  lunar  months,  12  months  (=  12  x  20,£ 
days)  or  354  days  +  10  days  (to  make  up  the  solar 
year),  or  364  days  in  all,  this  completing  the  one  whole 
year  which,  according  to  the  Babylonian  source,  was 
the  length  of  the  Flood's  duration.  Thus  the  author 
of  Jubilees  had  a  dogmatic  basis  within  the  text  of 
the  Pentateuch  itself  for  his  view  that  the  true  year 
was  a  solar  one  of  364  days.  He  may  very  well  have 
believed  that  whatever  may  be  the  exact  significance 
of  Gen.  i.  14,  it  could  not  override  this  fact.  It  is 
interesting  to  notice  that  this  tradition  of  a  solar 
year  of  364  days  should  be  implicit  in  the  P  sections 
of  Genesis.  There  are  strong  reasons  for  believing 
that  the  author  of  Jubilees  was  a  priest,  and,  as  such, 
may  have  been  acquainted  in  some  special  way  with 
this  priestly  tradition.  There  are,  however,  difficulties 
in  connexion  with  the  reckoning  of  such  a  solar 
year.     It  is  obvious  that  a  year  of  12  months,  each 

1  In    Hebraxca,    vol.    viii.    (1891-2),    cited     by    Charles  on 
vi.  32. 
B 


xviii  INTRODUCTION 

of  which  contains  30  days,  will  only  yield  a  total  cf 
360  days.  It  has  been  supposed  that  our  author 
overcame  this  difficulty  by  inserting  one  intercalary 
day  at  the  beginning  of  each  quarter.  Thus  each 
three  months  would  contain  31  -f  30  -f  30  (=  91) 
days.  But  this  solution  will  not  harmonjze  with  the 
date  assigned  by  our  author  to  the  Feast  of  Weeks, 
which  is  the  "  middle  "  of  the  third  month  (xvi.  13). 
Scholars  are  agreed  that  the  15th  of  Sivan  is  meant. 
Now  the  Feast  of  Weeks  was  to  be  celebrated  on  the 
fiftieth  day,  counting  from  the  "morrow  "  after  the 
Sabbath  of  Passover  (Lev.  xxiii.  15  f.).  The  Phari- 
sees, as  is  well  known,  interpreted  "  Sabbath  "  here 
to  be  the  first  day  of  the  Feast  (Nisan  15th),  whatever 
the  day  of  the  week  on  Which  it  fell,  and  reckoned 
from  Nisan  16th,  which  would  bring  the  Feast  of 
Weeks  to  Sivan  6th.  Another  view,  with  which  our 
Book  agrees,  interpreted  '*  sabbath  "  as  =  M  week  " 
(as  in  fact  it  has  this  meaning  throughout  the  rest  of 
the  verse).  Then  render  :  And  ye  shall  count  unto 
you  from  ,the  morrow  after  the  (festival)  week,  from  the 
day  that  ye  bring  the  wave-sheaf,  seven  complete  weeks 
shall  there  be,  until  the  morrow  after  the  seventh  week 
ye  shall  number  fifty  days  :  the  festival-week  would  be 
Nisan  15-21,  and  its  "  morrow  "  Nisan  22;  reckon- 
ing 28  days  to  the  month,  this  would  leave  6  days  in 
Nisan  -f-  28  days  in  Iyar  -f-  15  in  Sivan  =  49  -|- 
Nisan  22  =  50  days.  This  seems  to  have  been  the 
reckoning  of  our  author.  Moreover,  since  the  year 
he  advocates  contains  364  days,  the  festivals  would 
always  fall  upon  the  same  day  of  the  week,  and  as 
Nisan  1st  the  first  day  of  Creation  fell,  according  to 
his  scheme,  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  i.  e.  Sunday, 
it  must  always  fall  on  that  day ;  thus  Nisan  14th  and 
21st  would  always  fall  on  a  Sabbath,  while  Nisan  22nd 
and  Sivan  15th  would  always  fall  on  a  Sunday.  To 
make  the  Feast  of  Weeks  fall  on  the  1st  day  of  the 
week  was  a  Sadducean  practice,  and  one  that  it  is 
inconceivable  that  any  Pharisee  can  ever  have 
sanctioned  or  tolerated.     It  will  be  noticed,  however, 


INTRODUCTION  xix 

that  the  view  of  our  author,  according  to  which  the 
Feast  of  Weeks  falls  on  Sivan  15th,  implies  a  reckoning 
of  28  days  to  the  months  Nisan  and  Iyar.  How  is 
this  to  be  reconciled  with  a  solar  year  of  12  months? 
Eppstein  supposes  that  our  author  used  two  reckon- 
ings, one  for  the  civil  year  of  12  months,  8  of  30, 
and  4  of  31  days,  and  an  ecclesiastical  year  of  13 
months  each  containing  28  days.  But  it  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  the  writer  used  two  systems  side  by 
side.  A  better  solution  would  be  that  he  added  a 
week  to  every  third  month,  which  would  make  each 
3  months  consist  of  28  -f-  28  -f-  35  days  (total  91 
days),  or  4  +  4  +  5  weeks.  It  is  evident  that  his 
calendar-system  is  based  upon  the  number  7 ;  thus 
each  month  consists  of  4  X  7  (or  5  X  7)  days,  while 
the  year  consists  of  52  X  7  days,  the  year-week  of 
7  years,  and  the  jubilee  of  7  X  7  years.  On  this 
reckoning  the  Feast  of  Weeks  would  still  fall  on  the 
15th  of  Sivan,  but  the  15th  would  not  strictly  be  the 
"  middle  "  of  that  month,  which,  ex  hypothesi,  consisted 
of  35  days.  It  might,  however,  be  used  loosely  for 
such  a  date.  Perhaps,  too,  the  author  desired  to 
avoid  specifying  more  particularly  this  date,  because 
current  Sadducean  practice  (based  upon  a  different 
length  of  days  assigned  to  the  months)  wouid  not 
quite  harmonize  with  it.1  With  regard  to  the  Passover, 
it  is  noticeable  that  our  author  interprets  the  phrase 
"  between  the  two  evenings  "  (at  which  time  the 
Passover  lamb  was  to  be  slain,  cf.  Exod.  xii.  6; 
Lev.  xxiii.  5)  to  mean  the  third  part  of  the  day 
(xlix,  10) ;  i.  e.  assuming  the  day  to  contain  12  hours, 
we  may  fix  the  third  part  as  from  2  to  6  p.m.  This, 
again,  contradicts  Pharisaic  practice.  Notable,  too, 
is  the  mention  of  wine  in  connexion  with  the  Pass- 
over :    All  Israel  [i.  e.  in  Egypt]  was  eating  the  flesh 

1  Thu9  the  Abyssinian  Jews  (Falashas),  maintaining  old 
practice,  reckon  the  50  days  from  Nisan  22,  as  our  author 
*  does,  but  fix  Sivan  12  as  the  date  for  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  as 
they  use  al|terna;te  months  of  30  and  29  days.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  author  of  1  Enoch  lxxii -lxxxii.  also  advocates 
a  year  of  364  days. 


xx  INTRODUCTION 

of  the  paschal  lamb  and  drinking  the  wine  (xlix.  6). 
Now  this  was  a  Pharisaic  custom  in  later  times,  and 
has  no  basis,  apparently,  in  the  canonical  account  in 
Exodus.  In  view,  however,  of  the  fact  that  our 
author  usually  follows  the  prescriptions  of  Scripture 
with  scrupulous  care,  the  question  arises^whether  he 
did  not,  in  fact,  derive  this  from  the  Pentateuch. 
Leszynsky  suggests  *  that  the  word  rendered  "  bitter 
herbs "  in  Exod.  xii.  8  ("  with  bitter  herbs  shall 
they  eat  it  ")  was  interpreted  by  our  author  to  mean 
"  wine  " — the  word  simply  means  "  bitter,"  or  "  what 
is  poisonous,"  and  a  cognate  form  is  used  in  connexion 
with  wine  in  Deut.  xxxii.  32.  It  is  certainly  curious 
that  our  author  makes  no  mention  of  "  bitter  herbs  " 
in  connexion  with  the  Egyptian  Passover. 

The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  too,  as  described  in  our 
Book  (xvi.  10-31),  has  certain  peculiar  features. 
In  particular,  the  specifically  Pharisaic  custom  of 
pouring  water  on  the  altar a  at  the  Feast  is  not  men- 
tioned or  recognized.  Now  as  early  as  the  time  of 
Alexander  Jannaeus  (102-76  B.C.)  the  Pharisees 
tried  to  enforce  the  adoption  of  this  custom  upon  the 
Sadducean  priest-king,  who,  to  show  his  contempt, 
allowed  the  water,  which  should  have  been  poured 
solemnly  on  the  altar,  to  run  over  his  feet.  The 
protest  that  ensued  was  followed  later  by  a  massacre 
of  Pharisees.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  our  author, 
a  few  years  earlier,  if  he  was  himself  a  Pharisee,  could 
have  been  ignorant  of  this  custom,  which  was  based 
upon  old  popular  tradition.  His  silence  concerning 
it  is  much  more  probably  deliberate.  The  custom 
was  objectionable,  from  the  Sadducean  standpoint, 
because  it  had  no  basis  in  the  written  Law.  The 
custom  of  wearing  wreaths  upon  the  head  which  is 
here  prescribed  (xvi.  30)  is  also  unknown  to  tradition ; 
nor  has  it,  apparently,  any  Scriptural  basis,  unless  it 
was  inferred  as  an  act  of  rejoicing,  from  the  words 
"  and  ye  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God  seven 
days  "  (Lev.  xxiii.  40),  taken  in  conjunction  with  the 

1  Op.  cit.,  pp.  207  ff.  •  Cf.  R.W.S.*,  p.  401  f. 


INTRODUCTION  xxi 

» '  '  ■ 
command  (in  tlie  preceding  clause)  to  take  "  branches 
of  palm  trees,  and  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and  willows 
of  the  brook."  Wearing  a  wreath  of  palm-leaves 
may  have  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  ways  in  which 
this  command  was  to  be  fulfilled. 

Even  more  striking  are  the  sections  which  give 
directions  about  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath 
(1.  1-13;  cf.  ii.  29-30).  These  directions  are  very 
severe.  The  following  actions  are  prohibited  on  the 
Sabbath  under  penalty  of  death  :  travelling  by  land 
or  sea,  buying  or  selling,  drawing  water,  carrying 
burdens  out  of  the  house,  killing  or  striking,  snaring 
beasts,  birds  or  fish,  fasting  or  making  war,  marital 
intercourse.  The  last  prescription  is  in  direct  opposi- 
tion to  Pharisaic  practice,  as  is  also  the  severe  penalty 
imposed  for  non-observance  of  the  various  prescrip- 
tions. It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  these  agree 
with  the  practice  still  maintained  by  the  Falashas, 
Samaritans,  and  Karaite  Jews.  Probably  this  rigid 
view  of  sabbath-observance  was  cherished  in  specially 
pious  priestly  circles  at  the  time  when  our  author 
wrote.  In  this  connexion  it  may  be  noted  that  our 
Book,  in  its  interpretation  of  the  law  about  the  fruit 
of  newly-planted  trees  given  in  Lev.  xix.  23-24, 
agrees  with  the  view  of  the  Samaritans  and  Karaite 
Jews  in  directing  that  the  first  fruits  of  the  fruit  of 
the  fourth  year  should  be  offered  on  the  altar,  and 
what  remained  given  to  the  priests.  According  to 
Pharisaic  practice  what  remained  was  to  be  eaten 
by  the  owners  within  the  walls  of  Jerusalem. 

Another  point  in  which  Jubilees  upholds  a  view 
which  is  certainly  not  Pharisaic  is  on  the  question 
of  the  law  of  retribution,  the  so-called  lex  talionis. 
It  is  well  known  that  while  the  Sadducees  insisted  on 
the  strict  letter  of  the  Law,  "  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and 
a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  the  Pharisees  strove  to  mitigate 
its  harshness  by  the  substitution  (except  in  the  case 
of  murder  J  of  compensating  money -payments. 
Moreover,1  tneMish'na  directs  that  where  the  death- 
penalty  is  inflicted  it  is  to  be  carried  out  by  the 


xxii  INTRODUCTION 

sword  (cf.  Sanhedrin  ix.  I  :  "  These  are  to  be  be- 
headed ").  Qur  Book,  however,  seems  to  wage  a 
polemic  against  such  views  in  no  uncertain  language  : 

Ta/te  no  gifts  for  the  blood  of  man}  lest  it  be  shed  with 
impunity,  'without  judgement ;  for  it  is  the  blood  that 
is  shed  that  causes  the  earth  to  sin,  and  the  tarth  cannot 
be  cleansed  from  the  blood  of  man  save  by  the  blood  of 
him  who  shed  it.  A  nd  take  no  present  or  gift  for  the 
Uood  of  man  ;  blood  for  blood  (xxi.  19  f.). 

In  iv.  31  f  the  circumstances  of  Cain's  death  are 
described  :  his  house  fell  upon  him  and  he  died  in  the 
midst  of  his  house  ;  for  with  a  stone  he  had  killed  A  bet, 
and  by  a  stone  was  he  killed  in  righteous  judgement. 
For  this  reason  it  was  ordained  on  the  heavenly  tables  : 
"  With  the  instrument  with  which  a  man  kills  his 
neighbour,  with  the  same  shall  he  be  killed  ;  after  the 
manner  that  he  wounded  him,  in  like  manner  shall,  they 
deal  with  him." 

It  is  true  that  a  school  of  Pharisees  (the  School  of 
Shammai)  still,  to  some  extent,  upheld,  in  theory  at 
any  rate,  the  severer  and  older  view.  But  this  does 
not  alter  the  fact  that  it  was  a  distinctive  tenet  of  the 
Sadducees;  and  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  any 
Pharisee  can,  at  any  time,  have  used  such  unqualified 
language  as  that  employed  in  the  extracts  given  above.2 

At  this  point  we  may  well  ask  what  was  the  author's 
attitude  towards  the  belief  in  a  future  life  ?  At  the 
time  when  he  wrote  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  body  had  become  well  established  in  certain 
Jewish  circles.  In  the  Biook  of  Daniel  it  had  re- 
ceived classical  expression.  It  was  a  cherished  belief 
of  the  Pharisaic  party.  Now  our  Book  does  not  in 
any  way  accept  such  a  belief.  The  one  passage  in 
which  the  language  employed  might,  at  first  sight, 
suggest  a  hint  of  such  a  belief  is  a  sentence  describing 
the  happiness  of  the  righteous  in  the  age  of  felicity 
which  is  to  dawn  : 

1  This  would  be  allowed  in  certain  cases  of  homicide  (not 
deliberate  murder)  by  the  Rabbinical  Law. 
1  Cf.#  however,  xlviii,  14  note, 


INTRODUCTION  xxiii 

And  at  that  time  the  Lord  will  heal  His  servants, 
And  they  will  rise  up  and  see  great  peace, 
And  drive  out  their  adversaries  (xxiii.  30). 
But  here  there  is  probably  no  reference  to  the  idea 
of  a  resurrection.     As  Charles  points  out,  the  words 
11  shall  rise  up  "  have  here  "  apparently  no  reference 
to  the  resurrection,  and  mean  merely  that  when  God 
heals  His  servants  (cf.   Rev.   xxii.   2)  they  become 
strong."     The  clause  in  the  preceding  verse,  all  their 
days  will  be  days  of  blessing  and  healing  (cf .  also  i.  29) 
renders   "  this  view  the   most   probable."     On   the 
other  hand,  the  opening  words  of  xxiii.  31  : 
And  their  bones  will  rest  in  the  earth, 
And  their  spirits  will  have  much  joy, 
though  they  are  susceptible  of  another  interpretation, 
may  point  to  a  belief  that  the  righteous  dead  are 
destined  to  enjoy  a  blessed  immortality.     But  it  is 
to  be  noticed  that  no  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  idea ; 
and  in   any  case  no  countenance   is  given   to   the 
doctrine  of  resurrection.     This  attitude  accords  with 
the  Sadducean  position.     What  the  Sadducees  main- 
tained was  that  the  resurrection  doctrine  could  not 
be  proved  from  the  Pentateuch.     They  did  not  assert 
that  the  personality  was  annihilated  at  death,  or 
deny  the  doctrine  of  immortality — indeed,  it  is  by 
no    means    impossible    that    some    sections    of    the 
Sadducean    party   accepted    this   doctrine ;     but   in 
general  their  position  towards  this  question — apart 
From  that  of  the  bodily  resurrection — was  cautious 
and  reserved.     And  this  certainly  seems  to  be  the 
attitude  of  our  author.     It   should   be  noted   that 
Sheol    is    represented — somewhat    vaguely    and    in 
poetical  passages — as  a  place  of  punishment  for  the 
wicked  (vii.  29;  xxii.  22;  xxiv.  31).     This  looks  like 
the  converse  of  the  idea  that  the  righteous  dead  are 
destined   to  enjoy  a   blessed  immortality.     In   this 
connexion  a  word  may  be  said  about  the  angelology 
and  demonology  of  our  Book.     These  are  in  a  fairly 
advanced  stage,  and  imply  much  the  same  develop- 
ment as  is  to  be  seen  in  1  Enoch  and  the  Testaments  of 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION 

the  XII  Patriarchs.  There  are  three  classes  of 
angels,  two  of  a  superior  order,  the  angels  of  the 
presence,  and  the  angels  of  sanctiftcation  (cf.  ii.  2, 
18),  and,  besides  these,  a  numerous  inferior  order  who 
presided  over  natural  phenomena  (ii.  2).  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  two  superior  orders  are  Represented 
as  observing  the  Sabbath,  and  as  fulfilling  the  pre- 
scriptions of  the  Law  regarding  circumcision,  etc. ; 
they  even  observe  in  heaven  the  great  festivals,  such 
as  the  Feast  of  Weeks  (vi.  18). x  Various  activities 
are  assigned  to  the  angels  in  connexion  with  mankind 
throughout  our  Book? 

Over  against  the  angelic  orders  there  stands  a  well- 
organized  demonic  kingdom,  presided  over  by  "  the 
prince  of  the  Mast&ma  '  (cf.  xvii.  16;  xlviii.  2;  xviii. 
9,  12,  etc.).3  Among  the  Satanic  beings  that  appear 
in  our  Book  is  Beliar  (i.  20). 

What  is  the  attitude  of  our  author  towards  the 
Messianic  Hope?  The  hope  for  the  coming  of  the 
Messianic  King  who  should  spring  from  the  old  Royal 
House  of  David  was  always  cherished  among  the  masses 
of  the  people,  and  in  times  of  unusual  stress  was  apt 
to  flame  up  in  vivid  expression.  The  Pharisees,  who 
themselves  sprang  from  the  ranks  of  the  people,  were 
naturally  influenced  bv  this  tradition,  and  gave  literary 
expression  to  it  in  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  (70-40  B.C.  ?). 
But  at  the  time  when  our  author  wrote  the  desire  for  a 
Messianic  King  of  the  House  of  David  was  probably 
only  latent.  A  period  of  national  prosperity  came  in 
during  the  reign  of  John  Hyrcanus,  and  the  people 
generally  were  well  content.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed, 
however,  that  the  popular  hope  had  completely  died 
away.     It  was  merely  quiescent.     On  the  other  hand, 

1  Besides  the  above  there  were  the  seventy  angelic  patrons 
of  the  nations  (xv.  31  and  note)  and  the  guardian  angels  of 
individuals  (xxxv.  17). 

*  For  details  see  Charles,  op.  cit.,  p.  lvii  f. 

•  This  is  the  light  form  of  the  expression  (not  "  prince 
Mastema ")  :  "MastSma"  in  derivation  and  meanings 
"Sat^n"  (cf,  x,  8pote), 


INTRODUCTION  xxv 

there  was  a  party,  which  no  doubt  had  its  seat  in 
the  priesthood,  and  may  represent  the  old  Sadducean 
party,  that  claimed  for  the  priesthood  not  only 
sacerdotal  but  also  ruling  functions:  Levi's  descend- 
ants are  not  only  to  be  priests,  but  also  the  civil 
rulers  of  the  nation,  and  this  view  receives  expression 
in  our  Book  (cf.  xxxi.  15).  Now  it  is  well  known 
that  the  Pharisees  objected  to  the  double  office  being 
exercised  by  one  person,  and  when  Alexander  Jan- 
naeus  assumed  the  title  of  "  king  "  this  feeling  broke 
out  into  open  hostility.  At  a  somewhat  later  time 
a  Pharisaic  author  in  the  Psalms  of  Solomon,  looking 
back  upon  the  terrible  events  that  followed  the  break- 
up of  the  Hasmonean  dynasty,  evidently  regards 
the  bloody  chastisement  which  the  Jews  had  to  endure 
at  that  time  from  the  hands  of  the  Romans  as  the 
punishment  inflicted  on  the  people  for  having 
acquiesced  in  the  usurpation  by  the  Hasmoneans 
of  the  royal  dignity  which  had  been  reserved  for  the 
Messianic  prince  of  the  House  of  David.  Especially 
significant  in  this  connexion  is  the  promise  recounted 
in  our  Book  of  Levi  (xxxii.  1)  :  And  he  abode  that  night 
at  Bethel,  and  Levi  dreamed  that  they  had  ordained  and 
made  him  the  Priest  of  the  Most  High  God,  him  and 
his  sons  for  ever.  This,  originally  the  title  of  the 
priest-king  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv.  18),  was  revived 
by  the  Maccabean  princely  High  Priests,  and  there  is 
some  evidence  that  in  certain  ( ?  Sadducean)  quarters 
it  was  expected  that  the  Messiah  would  spring  from 
the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  even  from  the  priestly  ruling 
Maccabean  house.1  The  one  possible  reference  to 
the  hope  of  a  Messiah  from  Judah  in  our  Book  occurs 
in  the  blessing  of  Judah,  xxxi.  18  : 

A  prince  shalt  thou  be,  thou  and  one  of  thy  sons  over 
the  sons  of  facob  ; 

Here  Judah  is  addressed,  and  is  singled  out  for 
special  honour  by  the  side  of  Levi.     This  was  only 

1  Cf.  Tesf^Levi,  xviii. ;  Reuben,  vi. ;  Ps.  ex.  4  (  ?  addressed 
to  Simon  Maccabaeus).  The  Pharisees  objected  to  the  use 
pf  this  title. 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION 

natural,  as  the  Jews  derived  their  name  from  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  who  may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
symbol  of  the  nation  generally.  But  who  is  meant 
by  "  one  of  thy  sons  '  ?  Some  would  see  in  this  a 
reference  to  the  expected  Messiah,  but  if  this  be  so  it 
is  very  vague.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the 
historic  David  is'  meant.  The  priestly  'author  is 
significantly  silent  about  a  Davidic  Messiah.  Any 
Messiah  he  may  have  hoped  for  would,  according  to 
his  view,  spring  from  the  tribe  of  Levi.  He  does  not 
accept  the  view  that  the  Davidic  dynasty  is  of 
eternal  duration,  even  ideally.  May  he  not,  too, 
have  been  thinking,  in  the  address  to  Judah,  of  Judas 
Maccabaeus  ?  x  Judas  by  his  warlike  exploits  had 
shed  a  new  glory  on  the  name  "  Judah."  But  Judas 
himself  belonged  to  the  priestly  family  of  the  Has- 
moneans,  and  it  would  be  easy  for  our  author  to  see 
in  him  the  embodiment  of  the  glories  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  without  diminishing  the  claims  of  the  priestly 
tribe  to  civil  as  well  as  sacerdotal  primacy. 

In  the  same  context  (xxxi.  20)  two  lines  occur  in 
the  address  to  Judah  which  run  as  follows  : 

And  when  thou  sittest  on  the  throne  of  the  honour  of 
thy  righteousness, 

There  will  be  great  peace  for  all  the  seed  of  the  sons 
of  the  beloved. 
The  exact  meaning  of  these  words  is  not  clear.  They 
can  hardly  refer  to  the  expected  Messiah  from 
David's  House,  because  in  that  case  the  context 
would  demand  the  use  of  the  third  person,  whereas 
the  second  person  is  employed  and  Judah  is  being 
addressed.  Leszynsky  suggests  that  here  in  the 
Hebrew  original  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  the 
Sadducees,  suggested  by  a  word-play  in  the  Hebrew 
word  for  "  righteousness "  (sedek).  But  even  so 
the  sentence  is  not  clear.  Is  our  author  still  thinking 
of  Judas  Maccabaeus?  If  so,  he  may  mean  "and 
when  thou  (Judas),  in  the  person  of  thy  High-Priestly 
successors,  sitte&t  as  Priest-king  on  thy  Sadducean 

1  So  Leszynsky. 


INTRODUCTION  xxvii 

throne  of  honour.       It  must  be  admitted  that  this 
is  not  very  convincing,  and  the  sentence  remains 
obscure  and  uncertain  in  meaning.     But  of  the  high 
position  assigned  by  our  author  to  the  tribe  of  Levi 
there  can  be  no  doubt.     The  lofty  position  of  High- 
Priest  and  civil  ruler  is  assigned  to  Levi  as  a  reward 
for    the  destruction   of    Shechem   (cf.  xxx.  17-23 ; 
xxxii.   1-3).    As   Kohler  says  :    "  The   Levites  are 
represented  as  the  keepers  of  the  sacred  books  and 
of  the  secret  lore  entrusted  to  them  by  the  saints 
from  of  yore  (xlv.  ify  cf.  x.  14).    This  indicates  that 
the  priests  and  Levites  still  included  among  them- 
selves, as  in  the  days  of  the  author  of  the  Book  of 
Chronicles,  the  men  of  learning,  the  masters  of  the 
schools,  and  that  these  positions  were  not  filled  by 
men  from  among  the  people,  as  was  the  case  in  the 
time  of  Shammai  and  Hillel."     Other  features  of  our 
Book  entirely  accord  with  this.     For  instance,  the 
glorification  of  the  Patriarchs  in  which  our  author 
loves  to  indulge  is  the  development  of  a  tendency 
already    marked    in    the    Priestly    Sections    of    the 
Hexateuch.1    In    Jubilees    they    become    saints    of 
the  Law.     Incidents  which  might  reflect  discredit 
upon  them  (such  as  that  described  in  Gen.  xii.  11-13) 
are  omitted.    Abram  is  represented  as  having  known 
the  true  God  from  his  youth  (xi.  16-17;  xii.  iff.). 
Jacob  is  "  a  model  of  filial  affection  and  obedience." 
A  noticeable  feature  is  also  the  insistence  upon  the 
unique  position  of  Israel  among  the  nations,  and  its 
rigid  separation  from  the  latter.     Circumcision  is  a 
sign  of  Israel's  elect  position  (xv.  26)  and  a  privilege 
which  they  enjoy  in  common  with  the  two  chief 
orders  of  angels  (xv.  27).     This  is  also  true  of  the 
Sabbath,  which  the  same  angelic  orders  observe  with 
Israel.     It  is  needless  to  add  that  our  author  glorifies 
the  Law,  which  is  of  heavenly  origin  and  everlasting 
validity.     This  is  his  estimate  of  the  Law  in  its  narrow 
sense,  i.  e.  the  Pentateuch.     It  is  by  this  criterion 
that  he  measures  everything.     It  is  true  that  Jubilees 

1  See  Carpenter,  Hexateuch,  i.  123  (cited  by  Charles). 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION 

contains  incidents  and  amplifications  which  are  not 
to  be  found  in  the  written  Torah.  But  the  author 
is  careful  to  base  everything  that  is  of  legal  obliga- 
tion upon  the  letter  of  the  Law  itself.  Anything 
that  he  allows  himself  to  introduce  by  way  of  amplifi- 
cation or  addition  serves  merely  to  enhance  the 
obligation  of  the  written  precept:  '  ' 

Finally,  his  eschatology  is  essentially  that  of  one 
who  is  primarily  interested  in  the  Law.  In  xxiii. 
12-31,  he  introduces  an  apocalyptic  passage  which 
gives  a  history  of  the  Maccabean  times  from  the 
persecution  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  to  the  Messianic 
Kingdom,  the  advent  of  which  is  just  at  hand.  A 
dark  picture  is  drawn  of  the  inroads  of  Hellenism, 
and  of  its  disintegrating  effects  upon  the  observance 
of  the  Law  and  the  covenant  (xxiii.  16-20) ;  the 
warlike  efforts  of  the  Maccabees  to  reclaim  the 
Hellenizers  to  Judaism  are  then  described  (xxiii. 
20-22),  and  the  cry  of  the  nation  for  deliverance 
from  its  calamities  (xxiii.  23-25).  Then  follows  a 
passage  (xxiii.  26-32)  in  which,  as  a  consequence  of 
Israel  s  renewed  study  of  the  Law,  a  happier  period 
follows.  The  Messianic  Kingdom  is  to  be  "  brought 
about  gradually  by  the  progressive  spiritual  develop- 
ment of  man  and  a  corresponding  transformation 
of  nature."  Its  members  are  "  to  attain  to  the  full 
limit  of  1000  years  in  happiness  and  peace."  Prof. 
Charles  *  adds  :  "  The  writer  of  Jubilees,  we  can 
hardly  doubt,  thought  that  the  era  of  the  Messianic 
Kingdom  had  already  set  in." 

The  important  point  to  notice  about  this  picture  is 
that  the  dawn  of  the  happier  Age  is  brought  about 
by  renewed  study  and  observance  of  the  Law  : 

And  in  those  days  the  children  will  begin  to  study 
the  laws, 

And  to  seek  the  commandments, 

And  to  return  to  the  path  of  righteousness  (xxiii.  26). 

The  result  is  a  gradual  transformation  of  men  and 
their  environment.     There  is  no  catastrophe.     It  is 
1  Op.  cit.,  p.  bcxxvii, 


INTRODUCTION  xxix 

doubtful  whether  the  author  clearly  envisages  a  final 
judgement,  though  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  such, 
in  rather  vague  language.,  in  xxiii.  30  f.  The  tone 
throughout  is  priestly,  and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted 
that  the  author  was  a  priest. 

Authorship  and  Date 

According  to  Charles,  the  author  was  not  only  a 
priest  but  a  Pharisee  "  of  the  straitest  sect."  We 
have  already  seen  that  many  of  the  positions  advo- 
cated in  the  Book  are  essentially  un-Pharisaic  in 
character.  Such  a  fundamentally  Pharisaic  doctrine 
as  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  not  accepted,  and 
it  is  more  than  doubtful  whether  the  author  looked 
for  the  advent  of  a  Davidic  Messiah.  Moreover,  it 
is  difficult  to  conceive  any  Pharisee  at  any  time 
advocating  the  adoption  of  a  solar  calendar.  Then, 
again,  though  there  were,  of  course,  Pharisaic  priests 
in  later  times,  when  the  influence  of  Pharisaism  had 
become  all-powerful,  it  would  certainly  be  remarkable 
to  find. in  the  second  century  B.C.  so  priestly  a  writer 
as  our  author  a  member  of  the  Pharisaic  party. 
For  that  party  arose  from  the  ranks  of  the  people. 
It  was  essentially  a  lay  movement,  and  it  championed 
popular  religious,  as  opposed  to  priestly,  tradition. 
All  this  has  been  instinctively  felt  by  the  Jewish 
scholars  1  who  have  discussed  the  problems  connected 
with  the  authorship  and  general  character  of  our  Book. 
By  these  scholars  our  Book  has  been  variously  as- 
cribed to  Essene  (Jellinek,  1855),  Samaritan  (Beer, 
1856-7),  Hellenist  (Frankel,  1856),  and  Jewish- 
Christian  (Singer,  1898)  authorship.  None  of  these 
views  is  entirely  satisfactory.  More  can  be  said  for 
the  view  that  the, author  belonged  to  the  party — if 
party  it  can  be  called — of  the  Hasidim  ("  Assideans  " 
or  "  Hasideans  ")  who  are  referred  to  in  1  Maccabees.2 

1  With  the  distinguished  exception  of  Dr.  K.  Kohlcr  (in 
JE,  s.v.  Jubilees),  who  accepts  Charles's  view,  though  he 
suggests  that  t!he  book  may  reflect  early  Hasidaean  practice. 

2  Cf .  1  Mace,  vii 


xxx  ir/.  INDUCTION 

These  "  piolis  "  members  of  the  Jewish  community 
were  devoted  adherents  6f  the  Law,  and  banded 
themselves  together  to  resist  the  Hellenizers  even 
unto  death.  They  must  not  be  confounded  with  the 
Pharisees,  who  may,  however,  have  been  influenced 
by  them.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  earlier 
Hasidim  accepted  popular  religious  tradition  which 
had  no  basis  in  the  written  Law.  Indeed,  the  reverse 
is  probable.  We  know  that,  in  spite  of  their  anti- 
Hellenism,  they  scrupled  to  oppose  the  legitimate 
High  Priest,  even  when  he  was  on  the  Greek  side. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  doubtful 'whether  they  would 
have  countenanced  the  claim  that  the  priests  should 
exercise  civil  rule,  while,  as  we  have  seen,  the  author 
of  Jubilees  distinctly  takes  up  this  position,  and 
appears  to  have  been  an  admirer  of  the  Maccabean 
Priest-Princes — at  any  rate,  of  John  Hyrcanus l 
and  Simon  Maccabaeus.  Still  there  is  a  certain 
affinity  between  our  author  and  the  Hasidim,  and  if 
he  was  not  actually  a  "  Hasid,"  he  may  very  well 
have  been  in  sympathy  with  members  of  that  party 
in  fundamental  religious  positions.  Recently  Leszyn- 
sky,2  has  maintained  the  thesis  that  Jubilees  was 
written  by  a  Sadducean  author,  and,  it  must  be 
admitted,  makes  out  a  strong  case.  Unfortunately, 
scholars  are  not  yet  agreed  as  to  the  real  character 
and  position  of  the  Sadducean  party,  but  of  recent 
years  there  has  been  a  growing  consensus  of  opinion 
that  the  party  had  a  real  religious  basis.  It  was  not, 
as  it  is  sometimes  represented  to  have  been,  a  mere 
political  party  of  worldly  opportunists  who  used 
religious  questions  as  a  stick  to  beat  the  Pharisees, 
who  represented  true  religion,  while  the  real  interests 

1  It  is  true  that  John  Hyrcanus  favoured  the  Pharisees, 
according  to  Josephus  (Ant.,  xiii.  10,  5),  who  even  speaks  of 
him  as  their  "  disciple."  But  this  probably  means  no  more 
than  that  he  adopted  a  conciliatory  attitude  towards  them. 
He  also  had  intimate  friends  among  the  Sadducees  (Josephus, 
Ant.,  xiii.  10,  6). 

■  Die  Sadduzdcr  (1912),  pp.  179-236. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxi 

r 

of  their  opponents  were  to  safeguard  their  privileged 
position  and  wealth.  If  such  books  as  Sirach  are 
really,  in  any  sense,  Sadducean,  and  if  we  weigh  the 
evidence  of  Josephus  impartially,  we  may  conclude 
that  the  real  Sadducees  represented  the  conservative 
tradition  of  the  old  scribal  schools  which  grew  up 
under  priestly  influence.  The  Sadducees  stood  for 
the  written  Law  of  Moses  against  the  oral  tradition, 
derived  from  popular  religious  elements,  represented 
by  the  Pharisees.  What  could  not  be  proved  from 
the  Law  they  refused  to  accept.  Their  essential 
objection  to  the  new  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of 
the  body  was  that  it  could  not  be  proved  from  the 
Law.  They  stood  for  priestly  privilege  against  the 
democratic  tendencies  of  the  Pharisees,  who  wished 
to  bring  in  the  laity  as  much  as  possible.  It  was 
natural  that  this  party  should  be  strong  among  the 
priests,  and  especially  among  families  connected  with 
the  High  Priesthood.  The  best  members  of  it  were, 
no  doubt,  pious  devotees  of  the  Law.  This  is  not  to 
say  that  worldly-minded  members  of  the  party  did 
not  exist.  No  doubt  there  were  such,  and  some  such 
men  may  have  found  it  convenient  to  attach  them- 
selves to  the  Sadducean  party.  There  were  also 
worldly  and  hypocritical  adherents  in  the  ranks  of 
the  Pharisees.  But  in  neither  case  is  it  just  to 
estimate  the  essential  character  of  the  party  from 
such  elements.  The  persistence  of  the  Sadducean 
party  for  so  long  a  time  within  Judaism  suggests 
that  it  possessed  elements  of  real  vitality  and  vigour. 
No  doubt,  also,  it  was  divided  into  sections — one  such 
is  known  to  us  as  the  sect  of  the  Brethusians.  In 
view  of  its  long  continuance  as  an  active  party,  and 
its  significance  in  the  history  of  Judaism,  it  must 
have  stood  for  something  more  than  mere  negations. 
While  it  rejected  the  resurrection  doctrine,  the  hope 
of  a  Davidic  Messiah,  and  the  Pharisaic  oral  tradition, 
it  upheld  the  sole  binding  force  of  the  written  Torah, 
and  emphasized  priestly  privilege. 

Judged  by  these  criteria,  our  author  may  well  have 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION 

been  a  pious  Sadducean  priest.  It  is  not  necessary, 
of  course,  to  suppose  that  all  the  positions  upheld  in 
our  Book  were  commonly  accepted  by  the  Sadducean 
party.  Our  author  had  views  of  his  own,  particularly 
regarding  the  calendar — which  at  the  time  when  he 
wrote  seems  to  have  been  a  burning  subject  of  debate 
— which  would  not  necessarily  have  commended 
themselves  to  the  party  generally.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  the  positions  he  upholds  on  other  matters  often 
agree  with  those  of  the  Samaritans  and  Falashas  and 
Karaite  Jews,  who  are  well-known  to  represent  old 
Sadducean  views  on  various  points. 

On  one  point  of  detail  the  Ethiopic  text  of  our  Book 
does  uphold  a  specifically  Pharisaic  view.  In  xvi. 
18,  Israel  is  spoken  of  as  destined  to  become  a  kingdom 
and  priests  and  a  holy .  nation.  This  is  an  echo  of 
Exod.  xix.  6,  but  there  the  Hebrew  text  has  a  kingdom 
of  priests  ("  And  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of 
priests  and  an  holy  nation  ").  Now  the  alteration 
yielded  by  the  text  of  our  Book  here  reflects  the 
Pharisaic  exegesis  of  this  passage;  the  same  altera- 
tion appears  also  in  Rev.  v.  10  (cf.  i.  6).  The  Pharisees 
were  anxious  to  separate  the  kingdom  from  the 
priesthood,  and  expounded  Exod.  xix.  6  in  this  way, 
as  the  Jewish  Targums  attest.  But  the  original  text 
of  our  Book  can  hardly  have  been  under  any  such 
influence.  Such  an  exegesis  would  contradict  the 
express  claims  made  for  the  priesthood  elsewhere  in 
the  Book.  The  Latin  version,  which  has  "  a  kingdom 
of  priests  "  (as  in  the  original  Hebrew  text  in  Exod. 
xix.  6),  is  no  doubt  right.  Probably  the  Ethiopic 
scribe  was  influenced  by  the  form  of  the  text  in 
Rev.  v.  io,  and  introduced  it  here. 

We  may  sum  up  by  saying  that  the  author  was 
undoubtedly  a  pious  priest,  a  devoted  adherent  of 
the  Law,  and  an  upholder  of  priestly  tradition ;  he 
was  certainly  not  a  Pharisee,  but  has  affinities  with 
the  Hasidun  or  "  pious  "  of  early  Maccabean  times; 
not  improbably  he  was  a  Sadducean  priest.  The 
exact  date  of  the  composition  of  Jubilees  cannot  be 


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii 

fixed  with  absolute  certainty,  but  no  doubt,  as 
Charles  has  argued,  it  falls  some  time  within  the  reigns 
of  Simon  Maccabseus  or  John  Hyrcanus,  the  flourish- 
ing period  of  the  Hasmonean  rule.  This,  at  any  rate, 
may  be  inferred  from  the  historical  sketch  embodied 
in  the  apocalyptic  passage,  xxiii.  12-31,  and  is  rein- 
forced by  a  number  of  other  considerations.  The 
date  to  which  the  various  phenomena  point  is  some 
time  in  the  last  half  of  the  second  century  B.C. 

Bibliography 

The  important  edition  of  the  Ethiopic  text  by 
Charles  has  already  been  referred  to,  as  well  as  his 
English  translation  of  the  Book  with  Introduction 
and  Notes  (1902).  This  translation  has  also  been 
reprinted  (with  an  Introduction  and  Notes)  in  the 
Oxford  Corpus  (vol.  ii.  Pseudepigrapha,  1913)  and 
is  reproduced  in  the  pages  that  follow. 

The  most  recent,  and  in  many  respects  the  most 
important,  discussion  of  Jubilees  is  contained  in 
Leszynsky's  Die  Sadduzder  (Berlin,  1912),  pp.  179- 
236.  Leszynsky's  arguments  have  been  referred  to 
fully  above.  Kohler's  article  in  JE,  vol.  vii. 
("  Jubilees  Book  of ")  is  interesting  and  useful. 
Of  earlier  works  the  following  are  important : 

Jellinek,  Ueber  das  Buck  der  Jubilden  (1855) ; 

Beer,  Das  Buck  der  Jubilden  und  sein  Verhdltniss  zu 
den  Midraschitn  (Leipzig,  1856) ;  also  Noch  ein 
Wort  uber  das  Buck  der  Jubilden  (1857) » 

Frankel  in  M onatsschrijt  (1856) ; 

Singer,  Das  Buck  der  Jubilden  oder  die  Leplogenesis 
(Stuhlweissenburg,  1898). 
There   is   a  good   discussion    in    Schurer   GJV.,   iii. 
371-384,  with  full  Bibliography. 


SHORT  TITLES,   ABBREVIATIONS  AND   BRACKETS 
USED   IN   THIS   EDITION 

i  Enoch  =  The  Ethiopic  Book  of  Enoch. 

2  Enoch  =  The  Slavonic  Book  of  Enoch. 

Ap.  Bar.  =  The  Syriac  Apocalypse  of  Baruch. 

Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  is  cited  according  to  the  edition  (finglioh 
tmnrlntion  with  iwtnr  hy  Wi  Qi  ft  QijLli1c)i,  P.P.,  -em4 
■4\JI    Bom  M.A.)  of  G.  Friedlander  (London,  1916). 

MT  =  Masoretic  text. 

Sam.  =  Samaritan  version,  and  Hebrew  text  in  Samaritan 
characters  when  both  agree. 

Syr.  =  the  Syriac  version  of  the  Old  Testament. 

Vulg.  =  Vulgate. 

(  )  Words  or  letters  so  enclosed  are  supplied  by  the 
editor  from  some  other  source. 

[    ]     Words  so  enclosed  are  interpolated. 

t     t     Words  so  enclosed  are  corrupt. 

Charles's  Jubilees  =  The  Booh  of  Jubilees  translated  from  the 
Ethiopic  Text,  by  R.  H.  Charles,  D.D.  (London,  1902). 

JE  —  Jewish  Encyclopaedia. 

RWS*  =  Religion  and  Worship  of  the  Synagogue  (1911). 


THE    BOOK    OF   JUBILEES 


Prologue 

This  is  the  history  of  the  division  of  the  days  l  of 
the  law  and  of  the  testimony,  of  the  events  of  the 
years,  of 2  their  (year)  weeks,  of  their  jubilees  through- 
out all  the  years  of  the  world,3  as  the  Lord  spake  to 
Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  when  he  went  up  to  receive  the 
tables  of  the  law  and  of  the  commandment,  according 
to  the  voice  of  God  as  He  said  unto  him,  "  Go  up  to 
the  top  of  the  Mount."  4 

God's  Revelation  tc  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai 

(i.  1-26  :  cf.  Ex.  xxiv.  15-18). 

I.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  first  year  of  the 
exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  in  the 
third  month,6  on  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month, 
that  God  spake  to  Moses-;  saying  :  "  Come  up  to  Me 
on  the  Mount,  and  I  will  give  thee  two  tables  of  stone 
of  the  law  and  of  the  commandment,  which  I  have 
written,  that  thou  mayst  teach  them."  8  2.  And 
Moses  went  up  into  the  mount  of  God,  and  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  abode  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  a  cloud  over- 
shadowed it  six  days.     3.  And  He  called  to  Moses  on 

1  The  Prologue  sums  up  the  contents  of  the  Book  as  at 
once  a  history  and  a  chronological  system  based  upon  the 
number  seven. 

■*  i.e.  according  to  (their  year-weeks) :  a  year-week  =  seven 
years  (cf.  Lev.  xxv.  8  f.). 

8  The  writer  apparently  intended  to  write  a  history  from 
Creation  to  the  establishment  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom. 

4  Cf.  ExbcT.  xxiv.  12.  *  Cf.  Exod.  xix.  1. 

8  Cf.  Exod.  xxiv.  12. 

35 


36  THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES      [chap.  I 

the  seventh  day  out  of  the  midst  of  the  cloud,  and 
the  appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  like  a 
flaming  fire  on  the  top  of  the  Mount.     4.  And  Moses 
was  on  the  Mount  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  and 
God  taught  him  the  earlier  and  the  later  history  *  of 
the  division  of  all  the  days  of  the  law, and  of  the 
testimony.     5.  And  He  said  :    "  Incline  thine  heart 
to  every  word  which  I  shall  speak  to  thee  on  this 
Mount,  and  write  them  2  in  a  book  in  order  that  their 
generations  may  see  how  I  have  not  forsaken  them  for 
all  the  evil  which  they  have  wrought  in  transgressing 
the  covenant  which  I  establish  between  Me  and  thee 
for  their  generations  this  day  on  Mount  Sinai.     6.  And 
thus  it  will  come  to  pass  when  all  these  things  come 
upon  them,3  that  they  will  recognize  that  I  am  more 
righteous  than  they  in  all  their  judgments  and  in  all 
their  actions,  and  they  will  recognize  that  I  have 
been  truly  with  them.     7.  And  do  thou  write  for 
thyself  *  all  these  words  which  I  declare  unto  thee 
this  day,  for  I  know  their  rebellion  and  their  stiff 
neck,5  before  I  bring  them  into  the  land  of  which  I 
sware  to  their  fathers,  to  Abraham  and  to  Isaac  and 
to  Jacob,  saying  *.  "  Unto  your  seed  will  I  give  a  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.     8.  And  they  will  eat 
and  be  satisfied,  and  they  will  turn  to  strange  gods, 
to  (gods)  which  cannot  deliver  them  from  aught  of 
their  tribulation  :  "  and  this  witness  shall  be  heard  for 
a  witness  against  them.6    9.  For  they  will  forget  all 
My  commandments,  (even)  all  that  I  command  them, 
and  they  will  walk  after  the  Gentiles,  and  after  their 
uncleanness,  and  after  their  shame,  and  will  serve  their 
gods,  and  these  will  prove  unto  them  an  offence  and 
a  tribulation  and  an  affliction  and  a  snare.7    10.  And 


1  Cf.  i.  26.  According  to  the  Jewish  Midrash,  also,  God 
showed  Moses  "  all  the  generations  that  should  arise,"  as 
welPas  "  all  the  minutiae  of  the  Law  "  {Shemoth  rabb.  xl. ; 
Mcgilla  19b). 

*  Cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.  27.  *  Cf.  Deut.  xxx.  1. 

4  Cf.  i.  27.  •  Cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  27. 

•  Cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  20.  7  Cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  33. 


chap.  I]      THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  37 

many  will  perish  and  they  will  be  taken  captive,1 
and  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  because 
they  have  forsaken  My  ordinances  and  My  com- 
mandments, and  the  festivals  of  My  covenant,  and 
My  sabbaths,  and  My  holy  place  2  which  I  have  hal- 
lowed for  Myself  in  their  midst,  and  My  tabernacle,3 
and  My  sanctuary,  which  I  have  hallowed  for  Myself 
in  the  midst  of  the  land,  that  I  should  set  My  name 
upon  it,  and  that  it  should  dwell  (there).  II.  And 
they  *  will  make  to  themselves  high  places  and  groves 
and  graven  images,5  and  they  will  worship,  each  his 
own  (graven  image),  so  as  to  go  astray,  and  they  will 
sacrifice  their  children  to  demons,6  and  to  all  the  works 
of  the  error  of  their  hearts.  12.  And  I  will  send 
witnesses  unto  them,  that  I  may  witness  against  them, 
but  they  will  not  hear,7  and  will  slay8  the  witnesses 
also,  and  they  will  persecute  those  who  seek  the  law, 
and  they  will  abrogate  and  change  everything  so  as 
to  work  evil  before  My  eyes.  13.  And  I  shall  hide 
My  face  from  them,  and  I  shall  deliver  them  into  the 
hand  of  the  Gentiles  for  captivity,  and  for  a  prey, 
and  for  devouring,9  and  I  shall  remove  them  from  the 
midst  of  the  land,  and  I  shall  scatter10  them  amongst 
the  Gentiles.  14.  And  they  will  forget  all  My  law 
and  all  My  commandments  and  all  My  judgments, 
and  will  go  astray  as  to  new  moons,  and  sabbaths, 
and  festivals,  and  jubilees,  and  ordinances.  15.  And 
after  this  they  will  turn  to  Me  u  from  amongst  the 
Gentiles  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul 
and  with  all  their  strength,  and  I  shall  gather  them 
from  amongst  all  the  Gentiles,12  and  they  will  seek  Me, 
so  that  I  shall  be  found  of  them,  when  they  seek  Me 

1  N.  Israel  is  referred  to. 

•  t.  e.  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem. 

'  The    Tabernacle    is    apparently    thought    of    as    still    in 
existence  (in  Jerusalem)  during  the  time  oi  the  monarchy. 
4  t.  e.  Judah.  5  Cf.  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  3  fT. 

•  Cf.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  3,  xxxiii.  6.  7  Cf .  2  Chron.  xxiv.  19. 
8  Cf.  Matt.,xxiii.  34.                        •  Cf.  2  Kings  xxi.  14. 

18  Cf.  Deut.  iv.  27,  xxviii.  64. 

il  Cf.  Deut.  iv.  30.  ia  Cf.  Je'r.  xxix.  14. 


38  THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES      [chap,  i 

with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul.     16.  And 
I  shall  disclose  to  them  abounding  peace  with  right- 
eousness,  and   I   shall   tremove  them  the  plant  of 
uprightness!,1  with  all  My  heart  and  with  all  My 
soul,2  and  they  will  be  for  a  blessing  and  not  for  a 
curse,3  and  they  will  be  the  head  and  not  the  tail.4 
17.  And  I  shall  build  My  sanctuary  6  in  tlieir  midst, 
and  I  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  I  shall  be  their  God 
and  they  will  be  My  people  6  in  truth  and  righteous- 
ness.    18.  And   I   shall   not   forsake   them   nor   fail 
them ;  7    for  I  am  the  Lord  their  God."     19.  And 
Moses  fell  on  his  face  and  prayed  and  said,  "  0  Lord 
my  God,  do  not  forsake  Thy  people  and  Thy  inherit- 
ance,8 so  that  they  should  wander  in  the  error  of 
their  hearts,  and  do  not  deliver  them  into  the  hands 
of  their  enemies,  the  Gentiles,  lest  they  should  rule 
over  them  and  cause  them  to  sin  against  Thee.     20. 
Let  Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  lifted  up  upon  Thy  people, 
and  create  in  them  an  upright  spirit,9  and  let  not  the 
spirit  of  Beliar 10  rule  over  them  to  accuse  them  before 
Thee,  and  to  ensnare  them  from  all  the  paths  of 
righteousness,  so  that  they  'may  perish  from  before 
Thy  face.     21.  But  they  are  Thy  people  and  Thy 
inheritance,   which   Thou   hast   delivered  with  Thy 
great   power  u   from  the   hands  of   the   Egyptians  : 
create  in  them  a  clean  heart  and  a  holy  spirit,13  and 
let  them  not  be  ensnared  in  their  sins  from  henceforth 
until  eternity."     22.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  : 
"  I  know  their  contrariness  and  their  thoughts  and 
their  stiffneckedness,13  and  they  will  not  be  obedient 
till  they  confess  their  own  sjn  and  the  sin  of  their 

1  The  obelized  words  are  corrupt.  Charles  suggests 
reading  "  And  I  will  plant  them  the  plant  of  uprightness  in 
the  land." 

2  Cf.  Jcr.  xxxii.  41.  a  Cf.  Zech.  viii.  13. 

*  Cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  13.  *  i.  e.  the  second  Temple. 

6  Cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  12  and  often.       7  Cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  6. 

8  Cf.  Deut.  ix.  26.  •  Cf.  Ps.  li.  10. 

10  Beliar  (Belial)  is  here,  as  in  the  Ascension  of  Isaiah  (see 
Introduction  to  that  work),  a  Satanic  being,  apparently  "  the 
prince  of  the  devils."  n  Cf.  Deut.  ix.  29. 

ia  Cf.  Ps.  li.  10  (and  ver.  20  above).       M  Cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  27. 


chap.  I]      THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  39 

fathers.1  23.  And  after  this  they  will  turn  to  Me  in 
all  uprightness  and  with  all  (their)  heart  and  with  all 
(their)  soul,  and  I  shall  circumcise  the  foreskin  of 
their  heart  ■  and  the  foreskin  of  the  heart  of  their 
seed,  and  I  shall  create  in  them  a  holy  spirit,  and  I  shall 
cleanse  them  so  that  they  shall  not  turn  away  from 
Me  from  that  day  unto  eternity.  24.  And  their  souls 
will  cleave  to  Me  and  to  all  My  commandments,  and 
they  will  fulfil  My  commandments,  and  I  shall  be 
their  Father  and  they  will  be  My  children.  25.  And 
they  will  all  be  called  children  of  the  living  God,3  and 
every  angel  and  every  spirit  will  know,  yea,  they  will 
know  that  these  are  My  children,  and  that  I  am  their 
Father  in  uprightness  and  righteousness,  and  that  I 
love  them.  26.  And  do  thou  write  down  for  thyself 
all  these  words  4  which  I  declare  unto  thee  on  this 
mountain,  the  first  and  the  last,  which  shall  come  to 
pass  in  all  the  divisions  of  the  days  in  the  law  and 
in  the  testimony  and  in  the  weeks  and  the  jubilees 
unto  eternity,  until  I  descend  and  dwell  with  them  5 
throughout  eternity." 

God  commands  the  Angel  to  write  (i.  27-29). 

1 

27.  And  He  said  to  the  angel  of  the  presence  : 6 
"Write7  for  Moses  from  the  beginning  of  creation 
till  My  sanctuary  has  been  built  among  them  for  all 
eternity.    28. 8  And  the  Lord  will  appear  to  the  eyes 

1  Cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  40.  *  Cf.  Deut.  x.  16,  xxx.  6. 

•    »  Cf.  Hos.  i.  10. 

4  viz.  those  contained  in  our  Book  (the  Book  of  Jubilees) 
as  distinguished  from  the  Book  of  the  First  Law  (vi.  22  =  the 
Pentateuch),  which  was  written  by  the  angel  himself. 

•  viz.  in  the  perfect  theocracy  inaugurated  by  the  Messianic 
Kingdom. 

•  Cf.  Isa.  lxiii.  9;  Test.  Xll.Patr.,  Judah  23:  probably 
Michael  is  meant.  Note  that  the  medium  of  communication 
is  an  angel,  and  cf.  Gal.  iii.  19  ("  The  Law  .  .  .  ordained 
through  angels  ").     Later  Judaism  rejected  this  idea. 

7  f.  e.  not  the  Pentateuch,  "  but  a  history  up  to  the  Messianic 
Kingdom  "'(Charles,  in  Oxford  Corpus). 

8  Read  this  ver.  after  ver.  25. 


40  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES      [chap,  i 

of  all,1  and  all  will  know  that  I  am  the  God  of  Israel 
and  the  Father  of  all  the  children  of  Jacob,2  and  King 
on  Mount  Zion  *  for  all  eternity.  And  Zion  and 
Jerusalem  will  be  holy."  29.  And  the  angel  of  the 
presence  who  went  before  the  camp  of  Israel  4  took 
the  tables  of  the  divisions  of  the  years  6 — from  the 
time  of  the  creation — of  the  law  and  of  the  testimony 
of  the  weeks,  of  the  jubilees,  according  to  the  indivi- 
dual years,  according  to  all  the  number  of  the  jubilees 
[according  to  the  individual  years],  from  the  day  of 
the  [new]  creation  fwhenf  the  heavens a  and  the 
earth  shall  be  renewed  and  all  their  creation  according 
to  the  powers  of  the  heaven,  and  according  to  all  the 
creation  of  the  earth,  until  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  made  in  Jerusalem7  on  Mount  Zion,  and  all 
the  luminaries  be  renewed  for  healing 8  and  for  peace 
and  for  blessing  for  all  the  elect  of  Israel,  and  that 
thus  it  may  be  from  that  day  and  unto  all  the  days 
of  the  earth. 


The  Angel  dictates  to  Moses  the  Primaeval 
History  :  the  Creation  of  the  World  and 
Institution  of  the  Sabbath  (ii.  1-33 ;  cf.  Gen. 
i-ii.  3). 

II.  And  the  angel  of  the  presence  spake  to  Moses 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  saying :  Write  the 
complete  history  of  the  creation,  how  in  six  days  the 
Lord  God  finished  all  His  works  and  all  that  He 
created,  and  kept  Sabbath  on  the  seventh  day  and 
hallowed  it  for  all  ages,  and  appointed  it  as  a  sign 

1  Cf.  Rev.  i.  7  (in  the  final  theophany). 
1  Cf.  i.  24;    Jer.  xxxi.  1. 

•  Cf.  Isa.  xxiv.  23. 
4  Cf.  Exod.  xiv.  19. 

•  From  these  the  angel  dictates  to  Moses  (who  writes)  the 
Book  of  Jubilees. 

•  Text  corrupt.  Read  "  from  the  day  of  creation,  till  the 
heavens." 

7  i.  e.  in  th«  Messianic  Kingdom. 

•  Cf.  Rev.  xxii.  2. 


chap,  n]     THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  41 

for  all  His  works.  2.1  for  on  the  first  day  He  created 
the  heavens  which  are  above  and  the  earth  and  the 
waters  and  all  the  spirits  which  serve  before  Him — 
the  angels  2  of  the  presence,  and  the  angels  of  sanctifi- 
cation,3  and  the  angels  [of  the  spirit  of  fire  and  the 
angels]  of  the  spirit  of  the  winds,*  and  the  angels  of 
the  spirit  of  the  clouds,  and  of  darkness,  and  of  snow 
and  of  hail  and  of  hoar  frost,5  and  the  angels  of  the 
voices8  and  of  the  thunder  and  of  the  lightning,7  and 
the  angels  of  the  spirits  of  cold  and  of  heat,  and  of 
winter  and  of  spring  and  of  autumn  and  of  summer,8 
and  of  all  the  spirits  of  His  creatures  which  are  in 
the  heavens  and  on  the  earth,  (He  created)  the  abysses 
and  the  darkness,  eventide  (and  night),  and  the  light, 
dawn  and  day,  which  He  hath  prepared  in  the  know- 
ledge of  His  h,eart.  3.  And  thereupon  we  saw  His 
works,  and  praised  Him,  and  lauded  before  Him  on 
account  of  all  His  works ;  for  seven  great  works  did 
He  create  on  the  first  day.     a,  And  on  the  second 

*  2-3  record  the  creations  of  the  first  day,  seven  in  number, 
viz.  heaven,  earth,  the  waters,  spirits,  the  abysses,  darkness, 
light.  According  to  Pir^e  de  R.  FMezer  hi.,  "  eight  things 
were  created  on  the  first  day:  namely,  heaven,  earth,  the 
light,  darkness,  Tohu  (chaos),  Bohu  (void),  wind  (or  spirit), 
water."     Perhaps  Tohu  and  Bohu  here  =  abysses. 

*  According  to  our  Book  the  angels  were  created  on  the 
first  day,  and  this  probably  represents  the  view  of  earlier 
Judaism.  This  was  opposed  by  later  Judaism,  which  ob- 
jected to  the  idea  that  angels  assisted  in  the  work  of  creation 
on  the  days  following  the  first.  Pxrhe  de  R.  Eliezer  placed 
the  creation  of  angels  in  the  se cond  'day ;  some  Rabbis  on 
the  fifth  (cf.  Gen.  rabb.  i.  5). 

a  Cf.  ii.  18,  xv.  27,  xxxi.  14.  These  are  the  two  chief 
orders  of  angels.  The  "  angels  of  sanctification  "  sing 
praises  to  God. 

,  *  The  various  classes  of  angels  that  follow  constitute  the 
third  or  lowest  order.  They  preside  over  the  elements  and 
natural  phenomena;  cf.  1  Enoch  lx.  12-21,  Ixxv.,  lxxx. ; 
2  Enoch  xix.  1-4.  For  the  "  angels  of  the  winds,"  cf.  Rev. 
vii.  if.;    1  Enoch  xviii.  1-5,  xxxiv.-xxxvi.,  Ixxvi. 

*  Cf.  t  Enoch  lx.  17-18. 

*  Cf.  Rev.  iv.  5,  xi.  19,  xvi.  18. 

7  Cf.  1  Enoch  lx.  13-15. 

8  Cf.  1  Enoch  lxxxii.  13-20. 


42  THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES      [chap,  n 

day1  He  created  the  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters,  and  the  waters  were  divided  on  that  day — 
half  of  them  went  up  above  and  half  of  them  went 
down  *  below  the  firmament  (that  was)  in  the  midst 
over  the* face  of  the  whole  earth.  And  this  was  the 
only  work  (God)  created  on  the  second  day.  5.  And 
on  the  third  day  a  He  commanded  the  waters  to  pass 
from  off  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  into  one  place, 
and  the  dry  land  to  appear.  6.  And  the  waters  did 
so  as  He  commanded  them,  and  they  retired  from 
qff  the  face  of  the  earth  into  one  place  outside  of  this 
firmament,  and  the  dry  land  appeared.  7.  And  on 
that  day  He  created  for  them  all  the  seas  according 
to  their  separate  gathering-places,  and  all  the  rivers, 
and  the  gatherings  of  the  waters  in  the  mountains 
and  on  all  the  earth,  and  all  the  lakes,  and  all  the  dew 
of  the  earth,  and  the  seed  which  is  sown,  and  all 
sprouting  things,  and  fruit-bearing  trees,  and  trees 
of  the  wood,  and  the  garden  of  Eden,  in  Eden,  and 
all  (plants  after  their  kind).  These  four  great  works 
God  created  on  the  third  day.  8.  And  on  the  fourth 
day  3  He  created  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars, 
and  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to  give 
light  upon  all  the  earth,  and  to  rule  over  the  day  and 
the  night,  and  divide  the  light  from  the  darkness. 
9.  And  God  appointed  the  sun4  to  be  a  great  sign  on 
the  earth  for  days  and  for  sabbaths  and  for  months 
and  for  feasts  and  for  years  and  for  sabbaths  of  years 
and  for  jubilees  and  for  all  seasons  of  the  years.  10. 
And  it  divideth  the  light  from  the  darkness  [and]  for 

1  Cf.  Gen.  i.  6-7;  2  Enoch  xxvi.-xxvii.  According  to 
Ptrke  de  R.  Eliezcr  iv.  the  following  were  created  on  the 
second  day  :  the  firmament,  angels,  fire  for  flesh  and  blood, 
and  the  fire  of  Gehinnom. 

2  Cf.  Gen.  i.  9-13  (dry  land,  seas,  herbage,  fruit  trees  =  3 
works).     Our  Book  adds  a  fourth,  the  Garden  of  Eden  (so 
also   the  Midrash  Bereshith  rabb.  xv. ;     2    Enoch  xxx.   1). 
Another  view  was  that  Paradise  ( ?  the  Heavenly  Paradise) 
was  created  before  the  world;    cf.  4  Ezra  iii.  6  (note). 

9  Cf.  Gen.  i.  14-19;    2  Enoch  xxx.  2-6. 
4  Note  the  intentional  omission  of  the  moon.     The  writer 
objected  to  a  calendar  based  upon  the  changes  of  the  mooni 


chap.  II]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  43 

prosperity,  that  all  things  may  prosper  which  shoot 
and  grow  on  the  earth.    These  three  kinds  He  made 
on  the  fourth  day.     11.  And  on  the  fifth  day  l  He 
created  great  sea  monsters  in  the  depths  of  the  waters, 
for  these  were  the  first  things  of  flesh  that  were  created 
by  His  hands,  the  fish  and  everything  that  moves  in 
the  waters,  and  everything  that  flies,  the  birds  and 
all  their  kind.     12.  And  the  sun  rose  above  them  to 
prosper  (them),  and  above  everything  that  was  on 
the  earth,  everything  that  shoots  out  of  the  earth, 
and  all  fruit-bearing  trees,  and  all  flesh.     These  three 
kinds  He  created  on  the  fifth  day.     13.  And  on  the 
sixth  day  *  He  created  all  the  animals  of  the  earth,  and 
all  cattle,  and  everything  that  moves  on  the  earth. 
14.  And  after  all  this  He  created  man,  a  man  and  a 
woman  created  He  them,  and  gave  him  dominion 
over  all  that  is  upon  the  earth,  and  in  the  seas,  and 
over  everything  that  flies,  and  over  beasts  and  over 
cattle,  and  over  everything  that  moves  on  the  earth, 
and  over  the  whole  earth,  and  over  all  this  He  gave 
him  dominion.     And  these  four  kinds  He  created 
on  the  sixth  day.     15.  And  there  were  altogether  two 
and  twenty  kinds.8    16.  And  He  finished  all  His  work 
on  the  sixth  4  day — all  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  on 
the  earth,  and  in  the  seas  and  in  the  abysses,  and  in 
the  light  and  in  the  darkness,  and  in  everything. 
17.  And  He  gave  us  a  great  sign,  the  Sabbath  day,5 
that  wen 'should  work  six  days,  but  keep  Sabbath  on 
the  seventh  day  from  all  work.      18.  And  all  the 
angels  of  the  presence,  and  all  the  angels  of  sanctifi- 
cation,  these  two  great  classes — He  hath  bidden  us 

1  Cf.  Gen.  i.  20-23;  2  Enoch  xxx.  7;  4  Ezra  vi.  47  ff. 
According  to  our  Book  the  three  works  of  the  fifth  day  were 
the  great  sea-monsters,  fish  and  birds;  according  to  Pirke 
de  R.  Eliezer  ix.  birds,  fish  and  locusts. 

*  Cf.  Gen.  i.  24-28;    2  Enoch  xxx.  8  f. 

3  Cf.  ii.  23  (below). 

4  This  is  possibly  the  right  reading  of  Gen.  ii.  2a  (so  Sam. 
text,  LXX,  Syr.).  It  implies  a  severer  view  of  Sabbath  ob- 
servance.    The  Masoretic  text  has  "  seventh." 

6  Cf.  Exod.  xxxi.  13. 


44  THE   BOOK  OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  n 

to  keep  the  Sabbath  with  Him  l  in  heaven  and  on 
earth.  19.  And  He  said  unto  us  :  "  Behold,  I  will 
separate  unto  Myself 2  a  people  from  among  all  the 
peoples,  and  these  will  keep  the  Sabbath  day,  and.  I 
will  sanctify  them  unto  Myself  as  My  people,  and  will 
bless  them  ;  as  I  have  sanctified  the  Sabbath  day  and 
do  sanctify  (it)  unto  Myself,  even  so  shall  I  bless  them, 
and  they  will  be  My  people  and  I  shall  be  their  God. 
20.  And  I  have  chosen  the  seed  of  Jacob 8  from 
amongst  all  that  I  have  seen,  and  have  written  him 
down  as  My  firstborn  son,*  and  have  sanctified  him 
unto  Myself  for  ever  and  ever ;  and  I  will  teach  them 
the  Sabbath  day,  that  they  may  keep  Sabbath  thereon 
from  all  work.'  21.  And  thus  He  created  therein  a 
sign  6  in  accordance  with  which  they  should  keep 
Sabbath  with  us  8  on  the  seventh  day,  to  eat  and  to 
drink,  and  to  bless  Him  7  who  hath  created  all  things  as 
He  hath  blessed  and  sanctified  unto  Himself  a  peculiar 
people  8  above  all  peoples,  and  that  they  should  keep 
Sabbath  together  with  us.  22.  And  He  caused  His 
commands  to  ascend  as  a  sweet  savour  e  acceptable 
before  Him  *all  the  days.  ...  23.  There  (were)  two 
and  twenty  heads  of  mankind  from  Adam  to  Jacob, 
and  two  and  twenty  kinds  of  work  were  made 10  until 

1  The  two  chief  orders  of  angels  observe  the  Sabbath  with 
God  (and  Israel).  The  third  order  and  the  Gentiles  are 
denied  this  privilege. 

'  Cf.  1  Kings  viir.  53. 

1  Cf.  Isa.  xli.  8  ( '  Jacob  whom  I  have  chosen  "),  xliv. 
1,  2. 

*  Cf.  Exod.  iv.  22;    Ps.  lxxxix.  27. 

*  For  the  Sabbath  day  as  a  sign  between  God  and  Israel, 
cf.  Exod.  xxxi.  13,  17;    Ezek.  xx.  12. 

a  t.  e.  with  God  and  the  superior  angels. 
7  The  Sabbath  is  to  be  a  delight. 

*  Cf.  Deut.  vii.  6.  •  Cf.  2  Cor.  ii.  15;    Eph.  v.  2. 

10  It  is  probable  that  at  end  of  22  above  there  is  a  lacuna 
in  the  text  (indicated  by  the  dotted  line).  Charles  restores 
the  mussing  words  as  follows  :  As  there  were  two  and  twenty 
letters,  and  two  and  twenty  (sacred)  books  [viz.  in  the  CHd 
Testament],  and  two  and  twenty  heads  of  mankind  from 
Adam  to  Jacob,  so  there  were  made  two  and  twenty  kinds  oj 
work,  etc. 


chap,  ii]     THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  45 

the  seventh  day ;  this  r  is  blessed  and  holy ;  and  the 
former  2  also  is  blessed  and  holy ;  and  this  one  serves 
with  that  one  for  sanctification  and  blessing.  24. 
And  to  this  (Jacob  and  his  seed)  it  was  granted  that 
they  should  always  be  the  blessed  and  holy  ones  of 
the  first  testimony  and  law,  even  as  He  had  sanctified 
and  blessed  the  Sabbath  day  on  the  seventh  day. 

25.  He  created  heaven  and  earth  and  everything 
that  He  created  in  six  days,  and  God  made  the  seventh 
day  holy,  for  all  His  worjcs ;  therefore  He  commanded 
on  its  behalf  that,  whoever  doth  any  work  thereon 
shall  die,8  and  that  he  who  defileth  it  shall  surely  die. 

26.  Wherefore  do  thou  command  the  children  of  Israel 
to  observe  this  day  that  they  may  keep  it  holy  4  and 
not  do  thereon  any  work,  and  not  to  defile  it,  as  it  is 
holier  than  all  other  days.6  27.  And  whoever  pro- 
faneth  it  shall  surely  die,  and  whoever  doeth  thereon 
any  work  shall  surely  die  eternally,  that  the  children 
of  Israel  may  observe  this  day  throughout  their 
generations,  and  not  be  rooted  out  of  the  land ;  for  it 
is  a  holy  day  and  a  blessed  day.  28.  And  every  one 
who  observeth  it  and  keepeth  Sabbath  thereon  from 
all  his  work,  will  be  holy  and  blessed  throughout 
all  days  like  unto  us.  29.  Declare  and  say  to  the 
children  of  Israel  the  law  of  this  day  both  that 
they  should  keep  Sabbath  thereon,  and  that  they 
should  not  forsake  it  in  the  error  of  their  hearts; 
(and)  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  do  any  work  there- 
on which  is  unseemly,  to  do  thereon  their  own 
pleasure,*  and  that  they  should  not  prepare  thereon 
anything  to  be  eaten  or  drunk,7  jand  (that  it  is  not 
lawful)  to  draw  water,  or  bring  in  or  take  out  thereon 
through  their  gates  any  burden, |  8  which  they  had  not 

1  viz.  the  Sabbath.  *  viz.  Jacob. 

•  Cf.  Exod.  xxxi.  14,  15,  xxxv.  2;    Num.  xv.  32  f. 
4  Cf.  Exod.  xx.  8.  •  Cf.  ii.  30. 

•  Cf.  Isa.  lviii.  13.  7  Deduced  from  Exod.  xvi.  23,  25. 
8  The  obelized   words   should    either   be  omitted   or   read 

after  their  oyon  pleasure  above.  For  the  law  about  "  bringing 
in  or  taking  out  .  .  .  any  burden  "  on  the  Sabbath,  cf. 
ii.  30,  1.  8;    Jer.  xviu  21  f . ;    Neh.  xiii.  19;    John  v.  10. 


46  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  n 

prepared  for  themselves  on  the  sixth  day  1  in  their 
dwellings.-  30.  And  they  shall  not  bring  in  nor  take 
out  from  house  to  house  2  on  that  day ;  for  that  day 
is  more  holy  and  blessed  than  any  jubilee  day  of  the 
jubilees  :  on  this  we  kept  Sabbath  in  the  heavens  be- 
fore it  was  made  known  to  any  flesh  to  keep  Sabbath 
thereon  on  the  earth.  31.  And  the  Creator  of  all 
things  blessed  it,3  but  He  did  not  sanctify  all  peoples 
and  nations  to  keep  Sabbath  thereon,  but  Israel 
alone  :  them  alone  He  permitted  to  eat  and  drink 
and  to  keep  Sabbath  thereon  on  the  earth.  32.  And 
the  Creator  of  all  things  blessed  this  day  which  He 
had  created  fof  a  blessing  and  a  sanctification  and  a 
glory  above  all  days.  33.  This  law  and  testimony 
was  given  to  the  children  of  Israel  as  a  law  for  ever 
unto  their  generations.4 

ParadiBe  and  the  Fall    (iii.  1-35;   cf.  Gen.  ii. 

4-iii.). 

III.  And  on  the  six  days  of  the  second  week  we 
brought,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  unto  Adam 
all  the  beasts,  and  all  the  cattle,  and  all  the  birds,  and 
everything  that  moveth  on  the  earth,  and  everything 
that  moveth  in  the  water,  according  to  their  kinds,  and 
according  to  their  types :  the  beasts  on  the  first  day; 
the  cattle  on  the  second  day ;  the  birds  on  the  third 
day ;  and  all  that  which  moveth  on  the  earth  on  the 
fourth  day ;  and  that  which  moveth  in  the  water  on 
the  fifth  day.  2.  And  Adam  named  them  all  by  their 
respective  names,  and  as  he  called  them,  so  was  their 
name.6  3.  And  on  these  five  days  Adam  saw  all 
these,  male  and  female,  according  to  every  kind  that 
was  on  the  earth,  but  he  was  alone  and  found  no  help- 

This  is  in  accordance .  with  Rabbinic  law  which  forbids 
anything  being  eaten  on  the  Sabbath  unless  it  had  been 
prepared  beforehand  for  that  purpose  on  a  week-day. 

•  This  was  relaxed  later  by  the  Rabbinic  law  of  erub,  which 
was  based  on  Exod.  xvi.  29.     See  JE.  v.  203  f.  fs.v.  Erub). 

*  i.e.  Israel.        *  Cf.  Exod.  xxvii.  21,  etc.,  for  the  phrase. 
■  »  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  19. 


chap,  in] .  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  47 

meet  for  him.1  4.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  us  :  "It 
is  not  good  that  the  man  should  be  alone  :  let  us  make 
a  helpmeet  for  him."  f  5.  And  the  Lord  our  God 
caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  him,  and  he  slept, 
and  He  took  for  the  woman  one  rib  from  amongst 
his  ribs,  and  this  rib  was  the  origin  of  the  woman  from 
amongst  his  ribs,  and  He  built  up  the  flesh  in  its  stead, 
and  built  the  woman.  6.  And  He  awaked  Adam  out 
of  his  sleep  and  on  awaking  he  rose  on  the  sixth  day, 
and  He  brought  her  to  him,  and  he  knew  her,  and  said 
unto  her  :  "  This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones  and  flesh 
of  my  flesh;  she  will  be  called  [my]  wife;  because 
she  was  taken  from  her  husband. '  •  7.  Therefore 
shall  man  and  wife  be  one,  and  therefore  shall  a  man 
leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  cleave  unto  his 
wife,  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh.4  8.  In  the  first  week 
was  Adam  created,  and  the  rib — his  wife  :  in  the 
second  week  He  showed  her  unto  him  :  and  for  this 
reason  thej  commandment  was  given  to  keep  in  their 
defilement,  for  a  male  seven  days,  and  for  a  female 
twice  seven  days.6  9.  And  after  Adam  had  com- 
pleted forty  days  in  the  land  where  he  had  been 
created,  we  brought  him  into  the  Garden  of  Eden  to 
till  and  keep  it,  but  his  wife  they  brought  in  on  the 
eightieth  day,  and  after  this  she  entered  into  the 
Garden  of  Eden.  10.  And  for  this  reason  the  com- 
mandment is  written  on  the  heavenly  tables6  in 

1  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  20. 

■  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  18;  LXX  and  Vulg.  have  pi.  ("  let  us  make"  ), 
but  MT  Sam.  Syr.,  M  I  will  make." 

•  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  21-23.  According  to  the  Talmud,  Adam  was 
originally  (as  first  created,  Gen.  i.  27)  hermaphroditic. 

4  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  24. 

•  For  these  laws  cf.  Lev.  xii.  2-5,  according  to  which  in 
the  one  case  the  mother  was  not  to  enter  the  sanctuary  till 
the  lapse  of  forty  days,  in  the  other  eighty  days.  The  reason 
for  this  is  given  in  the  following  section  (9),  according  to  the 
author  of  Jubilees.  This  peculiar  idea  recurs  elsewhere 
(Philo,  Booh  of  Adam  and  Eve),  but  not  in  Rabbinic  literature, 
except  for  some  slight  traces.     See  Charles,  ad  he. 

•  Cf.  1  Enoch  lxxxi.  I,  2,  xciii.  2,  ciii.  2;  the  expression 
also  occurs  in  Test.  XII.  Patriarchs.     In  our  Book  the  heavenly 


48  THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  in 

regard  to  her  that  giveth  birth  :  "  if  she  beareth  a  male, 
she  shall  remain  in  her  uncleanness  seven  days  accord- 
ing to  the  first  week  of  days,  and  thirty  and  three 
days  shall  she  remain  in  the  blood  of  her  purifying, 
and  she  shall  not  touch  any  hallowed  thing,  nor  enter 
into  the  sanctuary,  until  she  accomplished  these  days 
which   (are  enjoined)  in  the  case  of  a  male  child. 
ii.  But  in  the  case  of  a  female  child  she  shall  remain 
in  her  uncleanness  two  weeks  of  days,  according  to 
the  first  two  weeks,  and  sixty-six  days  in  the  blood 
of  her  purification,  and  they  will  be  in  all  eighty  days." 
12.  And  when  she  had  completed  these  eighty  days 
we  brought  her  into  the  Garden  of  Eden,  for  it  is 
holier  than  all  the  earth  besides,  and  every  tree  that 
is  planted  in  it  is  holy.     13.  Therefore,  there  was 
ordained  regarding  her  who  beareth  a  male  or  a  female 
child  the  statute  of  those  days  that  she  should  touch 
no  hallowed  thing,  nor  enter  into  the  sanctuary  until 
these  days  for  the  male  or  female  child  are  accom- 
plished.    14.  This  is  the  law  and  testimony  which 
was  written  down  for  Israel,  in  order  that  they  should 
observe  (it)  all  the  days.     15.  And  in  the  first  week 
1  7  a.m.  of  the  first  jubilee,  Adam  and  his  wife  were  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden  for  seven  *  years  tilling  and  keeping  it, 
and  we  gave  him  work  and  we  instructed  him  to  do 
everything  that  is  suitable  for  tillage.2     16.  And  he 
tilled  (the  garden),  and  was  naked  and  knew  it  not, 
and  was  not  ashamed,8  and  he  protected  the  garden 
from  the  birds  and  beasts  and  cattle,  and  gathered 

tables  are  conceived  of  as  the  divine  statute  book  of  which 
the  Mosaic  Law  is  the  earthly  reproduction;  but  they  also 
contain  records  of  events  and  predictions.  The  underlying 
idea  is  predestinanan. 

1  According  to  Bet.  rabba  xviii.,  Sank.  386,  Adam  was 
only  six  hours  in  the  Garden ;  cf.  Ptrke  de  R.  Eliezer  xviii. 
(Adam  entered  the  garden  at  the  seventh  hour  and  was 
driven  forth  at  'twilight,  i.  e.  the  twelfth  hour  on  Friday 
the  eve  of  the  Sabbath). 

*  Agriculture  is  a  divine  institution.  Here  the  instruction 
is  given  by  <ange)s ;  contrast  Isa.  xxviii.  26-29.  See  also 
4  Ezra  vi.  42.     Test.  XII.  Patr.     Issaehar  iii.  5. 

a  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  25. 


chap,  in]    THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  43 

its  fruit,  and  ate,  and  put  aside  the  residue  for  him- 
self and  for  his  wife  [and  put  aside  that  which  was 
bein£  kept].1     17.1  And  after  the  completion  of  the 
seven  years,  which  he  had  completed  there,  seven 
years  exactly,  and  in  the  second  month,  on  the  seven- 
teenth day  (of   the  month),  the  serpent  came  and 
approached  the  woman,  and  the  serpent  said  to  the 
woman,  "  Hath  God  commanded   you,  saying,   Ye 
shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden  ?  "    18.  And 
she  said  to  it,  "  Of  all  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the 
garden  God  hath  said  unto  us,  Eat ;   but  of  the  fruit 
of  the  tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  God 
hath  said  unto  us,  Ye  shall  not  eat  thereof,  neither 
shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die."     19.  And  the  serpent 
said  unto  the  woman,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die:  for 
God  doth  know  that  on  the  day  ye  shall  eat  thereof, 
your  eyes  will  be  opened,  and  ye  will  be  as  gods,  and 
ye  will  know  good  and  evil."     20.  And  the  woman 
saw  the  tree  that  it  was  agreeable  and  pleasant  to 
the  eye,  and  that  its  fruit  was  good  for  food,  and  she 
took  thereof  and  ate.     21.  And  when  she  had  first 
covered  her  shame  with  fig-leaves,  she  gave  thereof 
to  Adam  and  he  ate,  and  his  eyes  were  opened,  and 
he  saw  that  he  was  naked.     22.  And  he  took  fig- 
leaves  and  sewed  (them)  together,  and  made  an  apron 
for  himself,  and  covered  his  shame.     32.  And  God 
cursed  the  serpent,  and  was  wroth  with  it  for  ever. 
.  .  .8  24.  And  He  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  be- 
cause she  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  serpent,  and 
did  eat;    and  He  said  unto  her  :  4  "  I  shall  greatly 
multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy  pains  :   in  sorrow  thou 
shalt  bring  forth  children,  and  thy  return  6  shall  be 
unto  thy  husband,  and  he  will  rule  over  thee."     25. 

1  The  bracketed  words  are  a  dittograph. 

*  For  17-22  cf.  Gen.  iii.  1-7. 

*  Charles  suspects  a  lacuna  here.  It  may  have  contained 
a  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  serpent's  four  feet,  which 
it  is  supposed  to  have  originally  possessed,  were  cut  off. 
Cf.  Targ.  Ps.-Jon.  on  Gen.  iii.  14,  and  Josephus,  Ant.  i.  1,  4. 

4  Cf.  Gen.  iii.  16. 

1  So  LXX  and  Syr.  (rj  inroarpatp-f)  <tov),  MT,  "  thy  desire." 
D 


50  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  in 

And  to  Adam  also  He  said,  "  Because  thou  hast  heark- 
ened unto  the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast  eaten  of  the 
tree  of  which  I  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldst 
not  eat  thereof,  cursed  be  the  ground  for  thy  sake  : 
thorns  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  eat  thy  bread  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face,  till 
thou  returnest  to  the  earth  from  whence  thou  wast 
taken ;  for  earth  thou  art,  and  unto  earth  shalt  thou 
return/'     26.  And  He  made  for  them  coats  of  skin, 
and  clothed  them,  and  sent  them  forth  from  the 
Garden  of  Eden.1     27.  And  on  that  day  on  which 
Adam  went  forth  from  the  garden,  he  offered  as  a 
sweet  savour  an  offering,  frankincense,  galbanum,  and 
stacte,  ana  spices    in  Jhe  morning  with  the  rising  of 
the  sun  from  the  day  when  he  covered  his  shame. 
28.  .AncT  on  that  day  was  closed  the  mouth  of  all 
beasts,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  birds,  and  of  whatever 
walketh,  and  of  whatever  moveth,  so  that  they  could 
no  longer  speak  :  8  for  they  had  all  spoken  one  with 
another  with  one  lip  and  with  one  tongue.     29.  And 
He  sent  out  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  all  flesh  that  was 
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  all  flesh  was  scattered 
according  to  its  kinds,  and  according  to  its  types  unto 
the  places  which  had  been  created  for  them.     30.  And 
to  Adam  alone  did  He  give  (the  wherewithal)  to  cover 
his  shame,  of  all  the  beasts  and  cattle.     31.  On  this 
account,  it  is  prescribed  on  the  heavenly  tables  as 
touching  all  those  who  know  the  judgment  of  the  law, 
that  they  should  cover  their  shame,  and  should  not 
uncover  themselves  as  the  Gentiles  uncover  them- 
8  a.m.    selves.4    32.  And  on  the  new  moon  of  the  fourth 
month,  Adam  and  his  wife  went  forth  from  the  Garden 

1  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  17-19,  21,  24. 

*  t.  e.  the  incense-offering  of  Exod.  xxx.  34. 

*  For  this  belief  cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  i.  1,  4.  The  idea  under- 
lying the  text  here  is  that  up  to  this  time  both  men  and 
animals  spoke  Hebrew,  which  was  the  universal  language 
till  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel. 

*  A  protest  against  the  Greek  custom  of  exposing  the 
person  in  public  athletic  sports;  cf.  1  Mace.  i.  13  f. ;  2  Mace, 
iv.  9-14;    Josephus,  Ant.  xii.  5,  1. 


chap,  in]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  51 

of  Eden,  and  they  dwHt.  in.  fb*  land  of  'Elda,1  in  the 
land  of  their  creaMon^,  33.  And  Adam  called  the 
name  ol~h7s  wife  Eve.  34.  And  they  had  no  son  till 
the  first  jubilee,  and  after  this  he  knew  her.  35.  Now 
he  tilled  the  land  as  he  had  been  instructed  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden.* 

Gain  and  Abel   (iv.  1-12;  cf.  Gen.  iv.). 

IV.  And  in  the  third  week  in  the  second  jubilee  she 
gave  birth  to  Cain,  and  in  the  fourth  she  gave  birth 
to  Abel,  and  in  the  fifth  she  gave  birth  to  h*r  daughter 
Awan,8  ±.  And  in  the  first  (year)  of  the  third  jubilee, 
Cain  slew  Abel  because  (God)  accepted  the  sacrifice 
c  of  Abel,  and  did  not  accept  the  offering  of  Cain.  3. 
And  he  slew  him  in  the  field  :  and  his  blood  cried 
from^the  ground  to  heaven,  complaining  because  he 
had  slain  him.4  4.  And  the  Lord  reproved  Cain 
because  of  Abel,  because  he  had  slain  him,  and  he 
made  him  a  fugitive  on  the  earth  because  of  the  blood 
of  his  brother,  and  he  cursed  him  upon  the  earth.5 

5.  And  on  this  account  it  is  written  on  the  heavenly 
tables,  "  Cursed  is  he  who  smiteth  his  neighbour 
treacherously,  and  let  all  who  have  seen  and  heard 
say,  So  be  it ;  and  the  man  who  hath  seen  and  not 
declared  (it),  let  him  be  accursed  as  the  other."  6 

6.  And  for  this  reason  we  announce  when  we  come 
before  the  Lord  our  God  all  the  sin  which  is  committed 
in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and  in  light  and  in  darkness, 
and  everywhere.  7.  And  Adam  and  his  wife  mourned 
for  Abel  four  weeks  of  years,  and  in  the  fourth  year 
of  the  fifth  weelc  they  became  joyful,  and  Adam  knew 

1  Charles  suggests  that  'Elda  may  be  a  corruption  of  the 
Hebrew  word  meaning  "  nativity  "  (land  of  "  nativity  "). 

•  Cf.  iii.  15. 

'*  i.  e.  "  iniquity "  (Heb.  'dwen).  Another  daughter, 
'Atdrd  (=  ?  "  well  guarded  "),  was  born  later.  Cain  married 
'Awan  and  Seth  'Azura.  There  is  great  divergence  as  to 
these  names  in  later  writers.  According  to  Pirhe  de  R. 
Eliezer,  Cain's  wife  was  his  twin-sister  (xxi.). 
4  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  4,  5,  8,  10. 

*  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  11-12.  •  Cf   Deut.  xxvii.  24. 


f         52  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  iv 

his  wife  again,  and  she  bare  him  a  son,  and  he  l  called 
his  name  Seth ;  for  he  said  "  God  hath  raised  up  a 
second  seed  unto  us  on  the  earth  instead  of  Abel ; 
for  Cain  slew  him."  2    8.  And  in  the  sixth  week  he 

134-140  begat  his  daughter  'Azura.  9.  And  Cain  took  'Awan 
AM-    his  sister  to  be  his  wife  and  she  bare  him  Enoch*  at 

190-196  the  close  of  the  fourth  jubilee.  And  in  the  first  year 
A  M     of  the  first  week  of  the  fifth  jubilee,  houses  were  built 

197  a.m.  on  the  earth,  and  Cain  built  a  city,  and  called  its 
name  after  the  name  of  his  son  Enoch.  10.  And 
Adam  knew  Eve  his  wife  and  she  bare  yet  nine  sons.4 

225-231  11.  And  in  the  fifth  week  of  the  fifth  jubilee  Seth 
a.m.    took  'Azura  his  sister  to  be  his  wife,  and  in  the  fourth 

235  a.m.  (year  of  the  sixth  week)  she  bare  him  Enos.5  12.  He  • 
began  to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  on  the  earth. 

The  Patriarchs  from  Adam  to  Noah  (cf.  Gen. 
v.) ;  Life  of  Enoch  ;  Death  of  Adam  and 
Gain  (iv.  13-33). 

3°9-3i5      13. 7  And  in  the  seventh  jubilee  in  the  third  week 

AM-    Enos  took  N6am  his  sister  to  be  his  wife,  and  she  bare 

325  a.m.  mm  a  son  in  {he  third  year  of  the  fifth  week,  and  he 

called  his  name  Kenan.     14.  And  at  the  close  of  the 

386-392  eighth  jubilee  Kenan  took  Mual&leth  8  his  sister  to  be 

AM-    his  wife,  and  she  bare  him  a  son  in  the  ninth  jubilee, 

395  a.m.  in  the  first  week  in  the  third  year  of  this  week,  and 

449-455  he  called  his  name  Mahalalel.     15.  And  in  the  second 

AM     week  of  the  tenth  jubilee  Mahalalel  took  unto  him  to 

wife  Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Baraki'61  the  daughter  of 

his  father's  brother,  and  she  bare  him  a  son  in  the  third 

461  a.m.  week  in  the  sixth  year,  and  he  called  his  name  Jared  ;• 

for  in  his  days  the  angels  of  the  Lord  descended  on 

1  So  Sam.;    but  MT  "  she."     In  our  Book  it  is  generally 
the  father  who  names  the  child. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  25.  f  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  17. 

4  Pseudo-Fhilo,  Bibl.  Antiq.,  gives  the  names  of  these  nine 
sons.    .  *  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  26. 

•  So  LXX  and  Vulg. ;    but  MT  "  then  it  was  begun  (men 
began)."  f  For  13-14  cf.  Gen.  v.  9,  12. 

•  A  fern,  form  =  "  she  who  praises  God." 

•  Cf.  Gen.  v.  15. 


chap,  iv]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  53 

the  earth,1  those  who  are  named  the  Watchers,*  that 
they  should  instruct  the  children  of  men,8  and  that 
they  should  do  judgment  and  uprightness  on  the  earth. 
16.  And  in  the  eleventh  jubilee  Jared  took  to  himself 
a  wife,  and  her  name  was  Baraka,  the  daughter  of 
Rasuial,  a  daughter  of  his  father's  brother,  in  the 
fourtn  week  of  this  jubilee,  and  she  bare  him  a  son 
in  the  fifth  week,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  jubilee, 
and  he  called  his  name  Enoch.4  17.  And  he  6  was 
the  first  among  men  that  are  born  on  earth  who  learnt 
writing  and.tcnpwleage  and  wicdom  *  and  who  wrote 
down  the  signs  of  heaven  according  to  the  order  of 
their  months  in  a  book,7  that  men  might  know  the 
seasons  of  the  years  according  to  the  order  of  their 
separate  months.  18.  And  he  was  the  first  to  write  a 
testimony,  and  he  testified  to  the  sons  of  men  among 
the  generations  of  the  earth,  and  recounted  the  weeks 
of  the  jubilees,  and  made  known  to  them  the  days 
of  the  years,8  and  set  in  order  the  months  and  re- 

1  This  last  line  looks  like  a  quotation  from  1  Enoch  vi.  6 
("  who  descended  in  the  days  of  Jared  ").  Note  the  play  in 
Hebrew  on  the  name  Jared  {ydred)  and  "  descended  (Heb. 
yaridH).  The  myth  of  the  descent  of  the  angels  was  based 
on  Gen.  vi.  1-4,  but  was  rejected  by  the  Rabbis,  who  rendered 
"  sons  of  God  "  (i.  e.  angels)  "  sons  of  the  judges." 

1  This  name  is  given  to  angels  in  Dan.  iv.  13,  17,  23;  in 
1  Enoch  it  is  applied  especially  to  the  fallen  angels  (cf. 
1  Enoch  i.  5,  x.  9,  15  and  often). 

•  This  statement  is  interesting.  It  describes  what  was 
probably  the  original  commission  by  God  to  the  angelic 
watchers,  who,  however,  fell  when  they  descended  to  the 
earth.  According  to  1  Enoch,  Enoch  acquired  his  super- 
natural knowledge  from  the  instruction  of  angels. 

4  Cf.  Gen.  v.  18. 

•  The  passage  that  follows  about  Enoch  (17-23)  implies 
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  author  of  Enochic  writings. 
Charles  infers  that  these  were  1  Enoch  vi.-xvi.,  xxiii.-xxxvi., 
and  lxxii.-xc. 

•  Cf.  the  phrase  "  Scribe  of  righteousness  "  applied  to 
Enoch  in  1  Enoch  xii.  4,  xv.  1. 

7  Probably  a  reference  to  1  Enoch  lxxii.-lrfxxii.  ("  Tho 
Book  of  the  courses  of  the  Heavenly  Luminaries  "). 

•  There  is  1  nothing  in  1  or  2  Enoch  about  "  jubilees,"  etc. 
This  statement  is  probably  due  solely  to  the  author  of  Jubilees, 
who  wished  to  invest  the  institution  with  a  spurious  antiquity. 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  iv 

counted  the  Sabbaths  of  the  years  as  we  made  (them) 
known  to  him.  19.  And  what  was  and  what  will  be 
he  saw  in  a  vision  l  of  his  sleep,  as  it  will  happen_to 
the  children  of  men  throughout  ..their  generations, 
until,  the  day  of  judgment;-. he  a  saw  and  understood 
everything,  and  wrote  his  testimony,  and  placed  the 
testimony  on  earth  for  all  the  children  'of  men  and 

582-588  for  their  generations.     20.  And  in  the  twelfth  jubilee, 

am.    in  the  seventh  week  thereof,  he  to^k_tq_hijnself__^, 

wife,  andjierjiAmf.  was  EdniJ*  t^E^ugEteLafJ^in^L 

587  a.m.  the  daughter  of  his  fathers- brother,  and  in  the  sixth 
year  inthis'week  she  bare  him  a  son  and  he  called  his 
name  Methuselah.4  21.  And  he  was  moreover  with 
the  angels  of  God  these  six  jubilees  of  years,  and  they 
showed  him  everything  which  is  on  earth  5  and  in  the 
heavens,  the  rule  of  the  sun,  and  he  wrote  down 
everything.  22.  And  he  testified  to  the  Watchers, 
who  had  sinned  with  the  daughters  of  men  ;  for  these 
had  begun  to  unite  themselves,  so  as  to  be  defiled, 
with  the  daughters  of  men,  and  Enoch  testified  against 
(them)  all.  23.  And  he  was  taken  from  amongst 
the  children  of  men,  and  we  conducted" him  into  the 
Garden  of  Eden  8  in  majesty  and  honour,  and  behold 
there  he  wnteth  down  the  condemnation  and  judgment 
of  the  world,  and  all  the  wickedness  of  the  children 
of  men.7  24.  And  on  account  of  it  (God)  brought  the 
waters  of  the  flood8  upon  all  the  land  of  Eden ;  for 
there  he  was  set  as  a  sign  aiRpTlial  lie  strontdtestify 
.  against  all  the  children  of  men,  that  he  should  recount 
all  the  deeds  of  the  generations  until  the  day  of  con- 

1  The  reference  is  probably  to  the  "  Dream-Visions " 
(1  Enoch  lxxxiii.-xc). 

2  i.e.  Enoch.  The  writings  of  Enoch  are  mentioned 
elsewhere  (1  Enoch,  Test.  XII.  Patriarchs). 

•  Edna  in  1  Enoch  lxxxv.  3. 
4  Cf.  Gen.  v.  21. 

6  1  Enoch  xxiii.-xxxvi. 

•  Cf.  1  Enoch  lxx.  1-3. 

7  Cf.  1  Enoch  xii.  3  f.,  xiv.  1.  The  title  ("  Scribe  of  the 
Knowledge  of  the  Most  High  ")  is  conferred  upon  Ezra  in 
4  Ezra  xiv.  50  (Syriac  text). 

•  Cf.  2  Enoch  xxxiv.  3. 


chap,  iv]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  55 

demnation.1  25.  And  he  burnt  the  incense  of  the 
sanctuary,  (even)  sweet  SDices,2  acceptable  before  the 
Lord  on  the  Mount.  20.  For  the  Lord  hath  four 
places^  on  the  earth,  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  the 
Mount  of  the  East.4  and  this  mountain  on  which  thou 
arFthis  day,  Mount  Sinai,  and  M6unt  Zion  (which) 
will  be -sanctified  in  the  new  creation  for  a  sanctifica- 
tion  of  the  earth ;  through  it  will  the  earth  be  sanctified 
from  all  (its)  guilt  and  its  uncleanness  throughout  the 
generations  of  the  world.5  27.  And  in  the  fourteenth 
jubilee  Methuselah  took  unto  himself  a  wife,  Edna 
the  daughter  of  'Azrial,  the  daughter  of  his  father's 
brother,  in  the  third  week,  in  the  first  year  of  this 
week,  and  he  begat  a  son  and  called  his  name  Lamech.6 
28.  And  in  the  fifteenth  jubilee  in  the  third  week 
Lamech  took  to  himself  a  wife,  and  her  name  was 
Be"t£n6s  the  daughter  of  Baraki'il,  the  daughter  of  his 
father's  brother,  and  in  this  week  she  bare  him  a  son 
and  he  called  his  name  Noah,  saying,  "  This  one  will 
Comfort  me  for  my  trouble  and  all  my  work,  and  for 
the  ground  which  the  Lord  hath  cursed."  7  29.  And 
at  the  close  01  the  nineteenth  jubilee,  in  the  seventh 
week  in  the  sixth  year  thereof,  Adam  died,  and  all 
his  sons  buried  him  in  the  land  of  his  creation,8  and 
he  was  the  first  to  be  buried  ■  in  the  earth.  30.  And 
he  lacked  seventy  years  of  one  thousand  years;  for 
one  thousand  years  are  as  one  day  in  the  testimony 

1  Cf.  x.  17.  ■  Cf.  Exod.  xxx.  7. 

•  Three  of  these  places  are  connected  with  critical  events 
in  the  history  of  the  world;  Eden  (with  Adam),  Sinai  (with 
Moses),  Zion  (with  David). 

4  The  exact  identification  is  uncertain;  possibly  the 
mount  above  Eden,  where  the  Scthites  live,  is  meant.  Other* 
suggestions  aro  Mt.  Ephraim,  which  would  imply  a  Samaritarr 
authorship,  and  Lubar,  on  Ararat,  which  would  connect  well 
with  the  history  of  Noah.  U 

•  Cf   i.  29.  •  Cf.  Gen.  v.  25.  ~.\ 
'  Cf.  Gen.  v.  29.                        •  Cf.  iii.  32. 

•  This  implies  the  view  that  Abel's  body  was  not  buried 
before  Adarri's1.  According  to  Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  (xxi), 
Adam  was  at  first  uncertain  what  to  do,  but  then  buried 
Abel's  corpse. 


56  THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES    [chap,  iv 

of  the  heavens  and  therefore  was  it  written  concern- 
ing the  tree  of  knowledge  :   "On  the  day  that  ye  eat 
thereof  ye  will  die."1     For  this  reason  he  did  not 
complete  the  years  of  this  day ;  for  he  died  during  it. 
31.  At  the  close  of  this  jubilee. Cain  was  killed  after 
him  in  the  same  year;    for  his  house  f eJW  upon  him^ 
andhfijfed  in  the,  midst  ^f  hir  h™^,  and  he  was 
kifledHby  its  stones;    for  with  a  stone  he  had  killed 
Abel,  andby  a  stone  was.  he  killed  in  righteous  judg- 
ment.    32.  For  this  reason  it  Was  ordained  on  the 
heavenly  tables  :    "  With  the  instrument  with  which 
a  man  killeth  his  neighbour  with  the  same  shall  he  be 
killed ;    after  the  manner  that  he  wounded  him,  in 
like  manner  shall  they  deal  with  him."  2    33.  And  in 
1205  a.m.  the  twenty-fifth  jubilee  Noah  took  to  himself  a  wife, 
and  her  name  was  'Emzara,  the  daughter  of  Rak6'el, 
the  daughter  of  his  father's  brother,  in  the  first  year 
1207  a.m.  in  the  fifth  week  :   and  in  the  third  year  thereof  she 
1209  a.m.  bare  him  Shem,  in  the  fifth  year  thereof  she  bare  him 
1212  a.m.  Ham,  and  in  the  first  year  in  the  sixth  week  she  bare 
him  Japheth.8 

The  Fall  of  the  Angels  and  their  Punishment ; 
the  Deluge  foretold  (v.  1-20;  cf.  Gen.  vi.  1-12). 

V.  And  it  came  to  pass  when  the  children  of  men 
began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the  earth  and  daugh- 
ters were  born  unto  them,  that  the  angels  of  God 4  saw 
them  on  a  certain  year  of  this  jubilee,  that  they  were 

1  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  14.  Notice  that  "  day  "  here  is  interpreted 
as  =  1000  years — a  belief  early  current  among  Jews  and 
Christians  (cf.  Ber.  rabba  xix.  on  Gen.  iii.  8),  2  Pet.  iii.  8. 
Justin  Martyr,  Tryf>ho.  lxxxi ;  cf.  also  Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  xviii. 

1  The  lex  taltonxs  ;  cf.  Exod.  xxi.  24  ("  eye  for  eye,  tooth 
for  tooth  ") ;  Lev.  xxiv.  19.  Similar  examples  are  given  in 
2  Mace.  v.  19  f.,  xv.  32  f.  The  rigorous  application  of  this 
"  law  "  was  upheld  by  the  Sadducees,  as  against  the  Pharisees. 

■  Cf.  Gen.  v.  22.  Note  that  Shem  is  represented  as  the 
eldest;   cf.  Gen.  x.  21  (R.V.). 

*  This  is  the  LXX  rendering  of  Gen,  vi.  2  (R.V.  "  sons  of 
God  ")  and  represents  the  older  Jewish  exegesis,  which  was 
jater  given  up. 


chap.v]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  57 

'1  1 
beautiful  to  look  upon ;  and  they  took  themselves 
wives  of  all  whom  they  chose,  and  they  bare  unto 
them  sons  and  they  were  giants.1  2.  And  lawless- 
ness increased  on  the  earth  and  all  flesh  corrupted 
its  way,*  alike  men  and  cattle  and  beasts  and  birds 
and  everything  that  walketh  on  the  earth — all  of  them 
corrupted  their  ways  and  their  orders,  and  they 
began  to  devour  8  each  other,  and  lawlessness  increased 
on  the  earth  and  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts 
.  of  all  men  (was)  thus  evil  continually.4  3.  And  X}od 
looked  upon  the  earth,  and  behold  it  was  corrupt, 
and  all  nesh  had  corrupted  its  orders,  and  all  that 
were  upon  the  earth  5  had  wrought  all  manner  of  evil 
before  His  eyes.  4.  And  He  said  :  "  I  shall  destroy 
man  and  all  flesh  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  which  I 
have  created."  5.  But  Noah  found  grace  before  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord.*  6.  And  against  the  angels  whom 
He  had  sent  upon  the  earth,  He  was  exceedingly 
wroth,  and  He  gave  commandment  to  root  them  out 
of  all  their  dominion,  and  He  bade  us  to  bind  them  in 
the  depths  of  the  earth,  and  behold  they  are  bound 
in  the  midst  of  them,  and  are  (kept)  separate.  7. 
And  against  their  sons  went  forth  a  command  from 
before  His  face  that  they  should  be  smitten  with  the 
sword,  and  be  removed  from  under  heaven.  8.  And 
He  said  "  My  spirit  will  not  always  abide  7  on  man ; 
for  they  also  are  flesh  and  their  days  shall  be  one 
hundred  and  twenty  years."  9.  And  He  sent  His 
sword  into  their  midst  that  each  should  slay  his  neigh- 
bour, and  they  began  to  slay  each  other  till  they  all 
fell  by  the  sword  and  were  destroyed  from  the  earth. 
10.  And  their  fathers  were  witnesses  (of  their  destruc- 
tion), and  after  this  they  were  bound  in  the  depths 
of  the  earth  for  ever,  until  the  day  of  the  great  con- 
demnation,8 when  judgment  is  executed  on  all  those 
who  have  corrupted  their  ways  and  their  works  before 

1  Giants,  i.  9.  "  Nephilim."  •  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  12. 

•  Cf.  1  Enoch  vii.  5.  «  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  5. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  12.  •  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  7,  8. 

T  Cf-  Gen.  vi.  3,  R.V.  marg.  •  Cf.  1  Enoch  x.  13. 


58  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  v 

the  Lord.     n.  And  He  |  destroyed!  all  from  their 
places,  and  there  jwasf  not  left  one  of  them  whom  He 
judged  not  according  to  all  their  wickedness.     12. 
And  He  fmadet  for  all  His  works  a  new  and  righteous 
nature,1  so  that  they  should  not  sin  in  their  whole 
nature  for  ever,  but  thould  be  all  righteous  «ach  in 
his  kind  alway.     13.  And  the  judgment  of  all  is 
ordained  arid  written  on  the  heavenly  tables  in  right- 
eousness—even  (the  judgment  of)   all  who  depart 
from  the  path  which  is  ordained  for  them  to  walk  in  ; 
and  if  they  walk  not  therein,  judgment  is  written  down 
for  every  creature   and   for  every  kind.     14.  And 
there  is  notjung  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  or  in  light  or 
in  darkness,  or  in  Sheol  or  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  place 
of  darkness  (which  is  not  judged) ;    and  all  their 
judgments  are  ordained  and  written  and  engraved. 
15.  In  regard  to  all  He  will  judge,  the  great  according 
to  his  greatness,  and  the  small  according  to  his  small- 
ness,  and  each  according  .to  his  way.     16.  And  He 
is  not  one  who  will  regard  the  person  (of  any),  nor  is 
He  one  who  will  receive  gifts,  ii  He  saith  that  He  will 
execute  judgment  on  each  :  if  one  gave  everything 
that  is  on  the  earth,  He  will  not  regard  the  gifts  or  the 
person  (of  any),  nor  accept  anything  at  nis  hands, 
for  He  is  a  righteous  judged     [17.  And  of  the  children 
of  Israel  It  hath  been  written  and  ordained  :   If  they 
turn  to  Him  in  righteousness,  He  will  forgive  all  their 
transgressions  and  pardon  all  their  sins.     18.  It  is 
written  and  ordained  that  He  will  show  mercy  to  all 
who  turn  from  all  their  guilt  once  each  year.] 8    19. 

x  10-12,  as  Charles  has  shown,  describe  the  final  judg- 
ment. The  tenses  must  be  altered  from  past  to  future. 
Render  :  "  until  the  day  of  the  great  condemnation,  when 
judgment  shall  be  executed.  .  .  .  And  He  shall  destroy  .  .  . 
and  there  shall  not  be  left  one  of  them  whom  He  shall  not 
have  judged.  .   .  .  And  He  shall  make,"  etc. 

*  Cf.  xl.  8;    Deut.  x.  17;    1  Chrpn.  xix.  7. 

"  The  bracketed  clauses  have  been  either  transposed  here 
cr  interpolated  from  xxxiv.  18-19.  The  reference  is  to  the 
Day  of  Atonement  which  takes  place  on  the  10th  of  the 
7th  month.     For  "  once  each  year,"  cf.  Heb.  ix.  7. 


*: 


chXp.v]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  59 

And  as  for  all  those  who  corrupted  their  ways  and 
their,  thoughts  before  the  flood,  no  man's  person  was 
accepted  save  that  of  Noah  alone ;  for  his  person  was 
accepted  in  behalf  of  his  sons,  whom  (God)  saved  from 
the  waters  of  the  flood  on  his  account ;  for  his  heart 
was  righteous  in  all  his  ways,  according  as  it  was  com- 
manded regarding  him,  and  he  had  not  departed  from 
aught  that  was  ordained  for  him.  20.  And  the  Lord 
said  that  He  would  destroy  everything  which  was  upon 
the  earth,  both  men  ami  cattle,  and  beasts,  and  fowls 
of  the  air,  and  that  which  moveth  on  the  earth.1 

The  Building  of  the  Ark  ;  the  Flood  (v.  21-32 ; 
cf.  Gen.  vi.  13-viii.  19). 

21.  And  He  commanded  Noah  to  make  him  an 
ark,  that  he  might  save  himself  from  the  waters  oi 
the  flood.1  22.  And  Noah  made  the  ark  jn  all  respects 
as  He  commanded  him,  in  the  twenty-seventh  jubilee 
of  years,  in  the  fifth  week  in  the  fifth  vearjon  the 
new  moon  of  the  Jirst  month).  23.  And  he  enterecT 
in  the  sixth  (year)  thereot,  in  the  second  month,  on 
the  new  moon  of  the  sernnH  mpjith^flM^jxtpSth^ 
and  he  entered,  ana  all  that  we  brought  to  him,  into 
the  ark,  and  the  Lord  closed  8  it  from  without  on  the 
seventeenth  4  evening. 

"  24.  And  the  Lord  opened  ^evgnflood-gates^  of  heaven, 
And  the  mouths  of  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep, 
seven  mouths  in  number. 

25.  And  the  flood-gates  began  to  pour  down  water 

from  the  heaven  forty  days  and  forty  nights, 
And  the  fountains  of  the  deep  also  sent  up  waters, 
until  the  whole  world  was  full  of  water. 

26.  And  the  waters  increased  upon  the  earth  : 
Fifteen  cubits  did  the  waters  rise  above  all  the 

high  mountains, 

1  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  7.  >  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  14. 

»  Cf.  Gen.  vii.'  i6(  *  Cf.  Gen.  vii.  n. 

•  Cf.    1    Enoch   lxxxix.    2.     Note   the   recurrence   of   the 
number  seven  in  these  connexions. 


6o  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  v 

.  And  the  ark  was  lift  up  above  the  earth, 
And  it  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.1 
2^.  And  the  water  prevailed  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
five  months — one  hundred  and  fifty  days.1  28.  And 
the  ark  went  and  rested  on  the  top  of  Lubar,  one  of 
the  mountains  of  Ararat.8  2Q.  And  Ibn  the  new 
mooiilin  the  foujlh  month TFe  fountain^  pi  the  great 
deep  were  closed  and  the  flood-gates  oi  heaven  were 
restrained;  and  on  the  new  moon  of  the  seventh 
mon^  all  the  mouths  of  the  abysses  of  the  earth  were 
opened,  and  the  water  began  to  descend  into  the  deep 
309  A.M.  below.4  30.  And  nn  thp  npw  moon  of  th«*  tenth  month 
the  tops  of  the  mountains  were  seen,  and  on  the  new 
moon  ofjhe  first  moiTth  the  earth  became  visible?* 
31.  And  the  waters  disappeared  from  above  the  earth 
in  the  fifth  week  in  the  seventh  year  thereof,  and  on 
the  seventeenth  •  day  in  the  second  month  the  earth 
was  dry.  32.  And  on  the  twenty-seventh^  thereof 
he  opened  the  ark,  and  sent  forth  from  it  beasts,  and 
cattle,  and  birds,  and  every  moving  thing.7 

Noah* 8  Sacrifice  ;  God's  Covenant  with  him 
(cf .  Gen.  viii.  20-ix.  17).  Instructions  to  Moses 
about  eating  of  Blood,  the  Feast  of  Weeks, 
etc.,  and  Division  of  the  Year  (vi.  1-38). 

VI.  And  on  the  new  m,oon  of  the  third  month  he 
went  forth  from  the  ark,  and  built  an  altar  on  that 
mountain.8  2.  And  he  made  atonement  for  the  earth,9 
and  took  a  kid  and  made  atonement  by  its  blood  for 

1  For  24-26  cf.  Gen.  vii.  11,  12,  18,  20. 
1  Cf.  Gen.  vii.  24,  viii.  3. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  viii.  4.     Lubar  is  mentioned  again  in  vii.  1,  17. 
4  Cf.  Gen.  viii.  2;    1  Enoch  lxxxix.  7. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  viii.  5,  13. 

•  According  to  Gen.  viii.  14  it  \vas  the  27th  day  of  the 
month. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  viii.  10. 

■  Cf.  Gen.  -viii.  20.     The  mountain  is  Lubar. 

•  The  earth  needed  expiation  aqcj  cleansing  for  the  vices 
and  crimes  that  had  polluted  it, 


Chaiwi]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  61 

all  the  guilt  of  the  earth ;  for  everything  that  had  been 
on  it  had  been  destroyed,  save  those  that  were  in  the 
ark  with  Noah.     3.  And  he  placed  the  fat  thereof 
on  the  aitar,  and  he  took  an  ox,  and  a  goat,  and  a 
sheep  and  kids,  and  salt,  and  a  turtle-dove,  and  the 
young  of  a  dove,  and  placed  a  burnt  sacrifice  on  the 
altar,  and  poured  thereon  an  offering  mingled  with 
oil,  and  sprinkled  wine  and  strewed  frankincense  over 
everything,   and  caused  a  goodly  savour  to  arise, 
acceptable  before  the  Lord.1    4.  And  the  Lord  smelt 
the  goodly  savour,*  and  He  made  a  covenant  with 
him  that  there  should  not  "be  any  more  a  flood  to 
destroy  the  earth ;  *    that  all  the  days  of  the  earth 
seed-time  and  harvest  should  never  cease ;   cold  and 
heat,  and  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night 
should  not  change  their  order,  nor  cease  for  ever.4 
5.  "And  you,  increase  ye  and  multiply  upon   the 
earth,  and  become  many  upon  it,  and  be  a  blessing 
upon  it.6    The  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you  I 
shall  inspire  in  everything  that  is  on  earth  and  in  the 
sea.6    6.  And  behold  I  have  given  unto  you  all  beasts, 
and  all  winged  things,  and  everything  that  moveth 
on  the  earth,  and  the  fish  in  the  waters,  and  all  things 
for  food ;    as  the  green  herbs,  I  have  given  you  all 
things  to  eat.7    7.  But  flesh,  with  the  life  thereof,  with 
the  blood,  ye  shall  not  eat ;  for  the  life  of  all  flesh  is 
in  the  blood,  lest  your  blood  of  your  lives  be  required. 
<nAt  the  hand  of  every  man,  at  theJiaj}cLj}i^v.exy_3 
m  (beast),  shall  I  require  the  blood"DTman.8     8.  WhoscC 
sheddeth  man's   blood   by  man   shall  his   blood  be  \ 
shed;    for  in  the  image  of  God  made  He  man.9    9. 
And  you,  increase  ye,  and  multiply  on  the  earth."    10. 
And  Noah  and  his  sons  swore  that  they  would  not  eat 

1  The  sacrifice  is  elaborated  here  to  accord  with  the  de- 
Lev,  ii. 


veloped  ritual  of  a  later  age ; 

cf.  Exod.  xxix.  4c 

2-5.  I5« 

1  Gen.  viii.  21. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  11. 

4  Cf.  Gen.)  viii.  22. 

8  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  7. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  1. 

7  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  2,  3 

■  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  4,  5. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  6. 

62  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vi 

any  blood  that  was  in  any  flesh,  and  he  made  a  cove- 
nant before  the  Lord  God  for  ever  throughout  all  the 
generations  of  the  earth  in  this  month.  II.  On  this 
account  He  spake  to  thee  l  that  thou  shouldst  make 
a  covenant  with  the  children  of  Israel  in  this  monjli 
upon  the  mountain  with  an  oath,  and  that  thou 
shouldst  sprinkle  blood  a  upon  them  because  of  all 
the  words  of  the* covenant,  which  the  Lord  made  with 
them  for  ever.  12.  And  this  testimony  is  written 
concerning  you  that  you  should  observe  it  continually, 
so  that  you  should  not  eat  on  any  day  any  blood  of 
beasts  or  .birds  or  cattle  during  all  the  days  of  the 
earth,  and  the  man  who  eateth  the  blood  of  beast  or 
of  cattle  or  of  birds  during  all  the  days  of  the  earth, 
he  and  his  seed  shall  be  rooted  out  of  the  land.  13. 
And  do  thou  command  the  children  of  Israel  to  eat 
no  blood,  so  that  their  names  and  their  seed  may  be 
before  the  Lord  our  God  continually.8  14.  And  for 
this4aw  there  is  no  limit  of  days,  for  it  is  for  ever. 
They  shall  observe  it  throughout  their  generations, 
so  that  they  may  continue  supplicating  on  your  behalf 
with  blood  before  the  altar ;  *  every  day  and  at  the 
time  of  morning  and  evening  they  shall  seek  forgive- 
ness 6  on  your  behalf  perpetually  before  the  Lord 
that  they  may  keep  it  and  not  be  rooted  out.  15 
And  He  gave  to  Noah  •  and  his  sons  a  sign  that  there 
should  not  again  be  a  flood  on  the  earth.  16.  He 
set  His  bow  in  the  cloud  for  a  sign  of  the  eternal 
covenant  that  there  should  not  again  be  a  flood  on 
the  earth  to  destroy  it  all  the  days  of  the  earth.7 
17.  For  this  reason  it  is  ordained  and  written  on  the 
heavenly  tables,  that  they  should  celebrate  the  feast 

1  i.  e.  Moses. 

1  The  proper  use  of  blood  in  the  daily  sacrifice  is  here 
referred  to;    cf.  14  below. 

•  For  12-13  °f-  L^v-  xvii.  10,  12,  14 ;   Deut.  xii.  23. 
4  Cf.  Lev.  xvii.  11. 

•  Cf.  Num.  xxviii.  3-8.     Note  that  in  our  text  here  11-14 
deal  with  the  Mosaic  development  of  the  covenant  with  Noah. 

•  The  text  here  returns  to  Noah. 
7  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  13-15. 


chap,  vi]    THE  BOOK  OF   JUBILEES  63 

of  weeks  *  in  this  month  once  a  year,  to  renew  the 
covenant  every  year.  18.  And  this  whole  festival 
was  celebrated  in  heaven  from  the  day  of  creation 
till  the  days  of  Noah — twenty-six  jubilees  and  five 
weeks  of  years :  and  Noah  and  his  sons  observed  it  for 
seven  jubilees  and  one  week  of  years,  till  the  day  of 
Noah's  death,  and  from  the  day  of  Noah's  death  his 
sons  did  away  with  (it)  until  the  days  of  Abraham, 
and  they  ate  blood.1  19.  But  Abraham  observed  it, 
and  Isaac  and  Jacob  and  his  children  observed  it 
up  to  thy  days,  and  in  thy  days  the  children  of  Israel 
forgot  it  until  ye  celebrated  it  anew  on  this  mountain. 
20.  And  do  thou  command  the  children  of  Israel  to 
observe  this  festival  in  all  their  generations  for  a 
commandment  unto  them  :  one  day  s  in  the  year  in 
this  month  they  shall  celebrate  the  festival.  21. 
For  it  is  the  feast  of  weeks  and  the  feast  of  first- 
fruits  :  *  this  feast  is  twofold  and  of  a  double  nature  :  6 
according  to  what  is  written  and  engraven  concerning 
it  celebrate  it.  22.  For  I  have  written  in  the  book  of 
the  first  law,§  in  that  which  I  have  written  for  thee, 
that  thou  shouldst  celebrate  it  in  its  season,  one  day  7 
in  the  year,  and  I  explained  to  thee  its  sacrifices  that 
the  children  of  Israel  should  remember  and  should  cele- 
brate it  throughout  their  generations  in  this  month, 
one  day  in  every  year.  23.  And  on  the  new  moon 
of  the  first  month,  and  on  the  new  moon  of  the  fourth 

1  The  "  Feast  of  Weeks  "  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.  22)  is  here  only 
connected  with  Noah's  covenant,  the  establishment  of  which , 
it  is  supposed  to  commemorate.  Later  Judaism  associated- 
it  with  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai.  It  was  celebrated*  1 
according  to  our  Book,  on  the  15th  day  of  the  3rd  month,    r 

■  Notice  that  the  non-observance  of  the  Feast  signalizes 
the  breaking  of  the  covenant-condition  aboilt  eating  blood. 

•  Or  "  the  first  day  (of  the"  week).     See  22  below.  1 

*  It  is  called  "  the  day  of  first-fruits  "  in  Num.  xxviii.  26. 

8  "  Of  a  double  nature  "  in  that  (?)  it  commemorates  the 
covenant  with  Noah,  and  also  ha3  an  agricultural  character. 

•i.e.  the  Pentateuch. 

7  Or  "the  .first  day"  (of  the  week)  =  Sunday.  Con- 
sequently, Pentecost  would  always  fall  on  the  same  day  of 
the  week,  Sunday.     This  accords  with  the  Sadducean  view. 


f>4  THE,  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vi 

month,  and  on  the  new  moon  of  the  seventh  month, 
and  on  the  new  moon  of  the  tenth  month  are  the  days 
of  remembrance,  and  the  days  of  the  seasons  in  the 
four  divisions  of  the  year.1  These  are  written  and 
ordained  as  a  testimony  for  ever.  24.  And  Noah 
ordained  them  for  himself  as  feasts  for  the  genera- 
tions for  ever,  so  that  they  have  become  thereby  a 
memorial  unto  him.  25.  And  on  the  new_mponof 
the  first  month  he  was  bidder^  {o  make  ior  hjmsp)f  an~ 
ark._and  on  that  (day)  the  earth  became  dry  anol  he 
opened  (the  ark)  and  saw  the  earth,  26.  And  on  the 
new  moon  of  the  fourth  month  the  mouths  of  the 
depths  of  the  abysses  beneath  were  closed.  And  on 
the  new  moon  of  the  seventh  month  all  the  mouths 
of  the  abysses  of  the  earth  were  opened,  and  the  waters 
began  to  descend  into  them.2  27.  And  on  the  new 
moon  of  the  tenth  month  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
were  seen,  and,  Noah  was  glad.8  28.  And  on  this 
account  herordained  them  for  himself  as  feasts  for  a 
memorial  for  ever,  and  thus  are  they  ordained.  29. 
And  they  -placed  them  on  the  heavenly  tables,  each 
had  thirteen  weeks ;  from  one  to  another  (passed) 
their  memorial,  from  the  first  to  the  second,  and  from 
the  second  to  the  third,  and  from  the  third  to  the 
fourth.  30.  And  all  the  days  of  the  commandment 
will  be  two  and  fifty  weeks  of  days,  and  (these  will 
make)  the  entire  year  complete.4  31.  Thus  it  is  en- 
graven and  ordained  on  the  heavenly  tables.     And 

1  According  to  Lev.  xxiii.  24  only  the  1st  day  of  the  7th 
month  was  a  "  day  of  memorial."  The  "  four  days  "  here 
mentioned  correspond  to  the  four  intercalary  days  "  which 
are  not  reckoned  in  the  reckoning  of  the  year  "  mentioned 
in  1  Enoch  lxxv.  1,  They  introduce  the  four  quarters  of 
the  year  and  apparently,  according  to  the  scheme  of  1  Enoch 
and  our  Book,  were  intended  to  be  added  to  the  360  days 
(=  12  x  30),  which  made  up  the  solar  year  (360  -j-  4  days). 

'  Cf.  1  Enoch  lxxxix.  7,  o. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  viii.  5. 

4  If  the  year  consists  of  52  weeks  (=4x13  weeks),  how 
can  it  be  divided  into  12  months  of  30  days  each,  which  is 
the  reckoning  implied  throughout  the  Book  ?  For  the 
solutions  proposed  see  Charles's  discussion,  ad  loc. 


chap,  vi]    THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  65 

there  is  no  neglecting  (this  commandment)  for  a  single 
year  or  from  year  to  year.  32.  And  command  thou 
the  children  of  Israel  that  they  observe  the  years 
according  to  this  reckoning — three  hundred  and 
sixty-four  days,  and  (these)  will  constitute  a  complete 
year,  and  they  will  not  disturb  its  time  from  its  days 
and  from  its  feasts ;  for  everything  will  fall  out  in 
them  according  to  their  testimony,  and  they  will  not 
leave  out  any  day  nor  disturb  any  feasts.1  33.  But  if 
they  do  neglect  and  do  riot  observe  them  according 
to  His  commandment,  then  they  will  disturb  all  their 
seasons,  and  the  years  will  be  dislodged  from  this 
(order),  [and  they  will  disturb  the  seasons  and  the 
years  will  be  dislodged]  ■  and  they  will  neglect  their 
ordinances.  34.  And  all  the  children  of  Israel  will 
forget,  and  will  not  find  the  path  of  the  years,  and  will 
forget  the  new  moons,  and  seasons,  and  sabbaths, 
and  they  will  go  wrong  as  to  all  the  order  of  the  years.8 
35.  For  I  know  and  from  henceforth  shall  I  declare 
it  unto  thee,  and  it  is  not  of  my  own  devising  ;  for  the 
book  (lieth)  written  before  me,  and  on  the  heavenly 
tables  the  division  of  days  is  ordained,  lest  they  forget 
the  feasts  of  the  covenant  and  walk  according  to  the 
feasts  of  the  Gentiles  after  their  error  and  after  their 
ignorance.  36.  For  there  will  be  those  who  will 
assuredly  make  observations  of  the  moon — now  (it) 
disturbeth  the  seasons  and  cometh  in  from  year  to  year 
ten  days  too  soon.*  37.  For  this  reason  the  years  will 
come  upon  them  when  they  will  disturb  (the  order), 

1  The  effect  of  a  solar  year  reckoned  at  364  days  would 
be  that  the  festivals  would  always  be  celebrated  on  the 
>same  day  of  the  week.  Nisan  14  would  always  fall  on  a 
Sabbath,  Nisan  22  (when  the  wave  sheaf  was  to  be  offered) 
on  a  Sunday,  and  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  Sivan  15,  on  a  Sunday. 
There  is  some  reason  to  suppose  that  this  conception  of  a  solar 
year  of  364  days  has  a  dogmatic  basis.    See  Introd.,  p.  xvii. 

1  The  bracketed  words  are  a  dittograph. 

•  For  33-34  cf.  1  Enoch  lxxxii.  4-6. 

'  A  lunar  year  consists  of  354  days.  Our  author  wages  a 
polemic  against  the  use  of  the  moon  for  determining  the 
seasons  and  feasts.  But  a  lunar  year  was  accepted  by  the 
Pharisees. 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vi 

and  make  an  abominable  (day)  the  day  of  testimony, 
and  an  unclean  day  a  feast  day,  and  they  will  con- 
found all  the  days,  the  holy  with  the  unclean,  and  the 
unclean  day  with  the  holy;  for  they  will  go  wrong 
as  to  the  months  and  sabbaths  and  feasts  and  jubilees. 
38.  For  this  reason  I  command  and  testify  to  thee 
that  thou  mayest  testify  to  them ;  for  af^r  thy  death 
thy  children  will  disturb  (them),  so  that  they  will 
not  make  the  year  three  hundred  and  sixty-four  days 
only,  and  for  this  reason  they  will  go  wrong  as  to  the 
new  moons  *  and  seasons  and  sabbaths  and  festivals, 
and  they  will  eat  all  kinds  of  blood  with  all  kinds  of 
flesh. 


"  Noah  offers  Sacrifice  ;  the  Cursing  of  Canaan 
(cf.  Gen.  ix.  20-28)  :  Noah's  Sons  and  Grand- 
sons (cf.  Gen.  x.)  and  their  Cities.  Noah's 
Admonitions  (vii.  1-39). 

1317  A.M.  VII.  And  in  the  seventh  week  in  the  first  year 
thereof,  in  this  jubilee,  Noah  planted  vines  on  the 
mountain  on  which  the  ark  had  rested,  named 
Lubar,2  one  of  the  Ararat  Mountains,  and  they  pro- 

1320  a.m.  duced  fruit  in  the  fourth  year,1  and  he  guarded  their 

fruit,  and  gathered  it  in  this  year  in  the  seventh 
month.     2.  And  he  made  wine  therefrom  and  put  it 

1321  a.m.  into  a  vessel,  and  kept  it  until  the  fifth  year,  until  the 

first  day,  on  the  new  moon  of  the  first  month.  3.  And 
he  celebrated  with  joy  the  day  of  this  feast,  and  he 
made  a -burnt  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  one  young  ox 
and  one  ram,  and  seven  sheep,  each  a  year  old,  and  a 
kict  of  the  goats,  that  he  might  make  atonement 
thereby  for  himself  and  his  sons.*  4.  And  he  prepared 
the  kid  first,  and  placed  some  of  its  blood  on  the  flesh 
that  was  on  the  altar  which  he  had  made,  and  all  the 

1  Render  (for  "  new  moons  ")  "  beginnings  of  the  months." 
»  Cf.  v.  28. 

•  Cf.   Lev.  xix.   23-25    (fruit  of  trees  not  to  be   touched 
during  the  first  three  years  after  planting). 

*  Cf.  Num.  xxix.  2,  5. 


;  m 


chap,  vii]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  67 

fat  he  laid  on  the  altar  where  he  made  the  burnt 
sacrifice,  and  the  ox  and  the  ram  and  the  sheep,  and 
he  laid  all  their  flesh  upon  the  altar.  5.  And  he 
placed  all  their  offerings  mingled  with  oil  upon  it,  and 
afterwards  he  sprinkled  wine  on  the  fire  which  he  had 
previously  made  on  the  altar,  and  he  placed  incense 
on  the  altar  and  caused  a  sweet  savour  to  ascend 
acceptable  before  the  Lord  his  God.  6.  And  he 
rejoiced  and  drank  of  this  wine,  he  and  his  children 
with  joy*  7.  And  it  was  evening,  and  he  went  into 
his  tent,  and  being  drunken  he  lay  down  and  slept, 
and  was  uncovered  in  his  tent  as  he  slept.1  8.  And 
Ham  saw  Noah  his  father  naked,  and  went  forth  and 
told  his  two  brethren  without.  9.  And  Shem  took  his 
garment  and  arose,  he  and  Japheth,  and  they  placed 
the  garment  on  their  shoulders  and  went  backward 
and  covered  the  shame  of  their  father,  and  their  faces 
were  backward.'  10.  And  tyoah  awoke  from  his  sleep 
and  knew  all  that  his  younger  son  had  done  unto 
him,  and  he  cursed  his  son  and  said  :  "  Cursed  be 
Canaan;  an  enslaved  servant  shall  he  be  unto  his 
brethren."  s  11.  And  he  blessed  Shem,  and  said  : 
"  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Shem,  and  Canaan  shall 
be  his  servant.  12.  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and 
God  shall  dwell  in  the  dwelling  of  Shem,  and  Canaan 
shall  be  his  servant."  *  13.  And  Ham  knew  that  his 
father  had  cursed  his  younger  son,  and  he  was  dis- 
pleased that  he  had  cursed  his  son,  and  he  parted 
-  irom  his  father,  he  and  his  sons  with  him,  Cush  and 
Mizraim  and  Put  and  Canaan.5  14.  And  he  built  for 
himself  a  city  and  called  its  name  after  the  name  of 
his  wife  N6  elatama'flk.  15.  And  Japheth  saw  it, 
and  became  envious  of  his  brother,  and  he  too  built 
for  himself  a  city,  and  he  called  its  name  after  the 
name  of  his  wife  'Adataneses.  16.  And  Shem  dwelt 
with  his  father  Noah,  and  he  built  a  city  close  to  his 
father  on  the  mountain,  and  he  too  called  its  name 

1  For  6-7  fcf.  Gen.  ix.  21.         *  For  S-9  cf.  Gen.  be.  22-23. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  24-25.  4  For  11-12  cf.  Gen.  ix.  26-27. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  x.  6. 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vn 

after  the  name  of  his  wife  S6d6q£t61gb£b.1  17.  And 
behold  these  three  cities  are  near  Mount  Lubar; 
Sedeqet£l£bab  fronting  the  mountain  on  its  east ;  and 
Na'61atama'uk  on  the  south ;  'AdatanSses  towards  the 
west.  18.  And  these  are  the  sons  of  Shem  :  Elam. 
and  Asshur,  and  Arpachshad — this  (son)  was  born 
two  years  after  the  flood — and  Lud,  and  Aram.'  19. 
The  sons  of  Japheth  :  Gomer  and  Magog  and  Madai 
and  Javan,  Tubal  and  Meshech  and  Tiras  :  these  are 
1324-1372  the  sons  of  Noah.8  20. 4  And  in  the  twenty-eighth 
a.m.  jubilee  Noah  began  to  enjoin  upon  his  sons'  sons  the 

ordinances  and  commandments,  and  all  the  judgments 
that  he  knew,  and  he  exhorted  his  sons  to  observe 
righteousness,  and  to  cover  the  shame  6  of  their  flesh, 
and  to  bless  their  Creator,  and  honour  father  and 
mother,  and  love  their  neighbour,  and  guard  their 
souls  from  fornication  and  uncleanness  and  all  ini- 
quity. Si.  For  owing  to  these  three  things  •  came 
the  flood  upon  the  earth,  namely,  owing  to  the  forni- 
cation wherein  the  Watchers  against  the  law  of  their 
ordinances  went  a  whoring  after  the  daughters  of  men, 
and  took  themselves  wives  of  all  which  they  chose  : T 
and  they  made  the  beginning  of  uncleanness.  22. 
And  they  begat  sons  the  Naphidtm,8  and  jthey  were 
all  unlikej,*  and  they  devoured  one  another :  and  the 
Giants^lewllieliipiuL and  the Naphil  slew  the  Elj6, 
and  the  EIj6*  mankind,  and  one  man  another.  23. 
And  every  one  sold  himself  w  to  work  iniquity  and  to 

1  «=  "  righteousness  of  the  heart." 

1  Cf.  Gen.  x.  22.  •  Cf.  Gen.  x.  2. 

*  From  here  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  there  is  incorporated 
a  fragment  of  the  lost  Book  of  Noah. 

•  Cf.  ui.  31. 

*  viz.  fornication,  uncleanness  and  all  iniquity.  Accord- 
ing to  Maimonides  (Kings,  89)  Adam  received  six  command- 
ments against  (1)  idolatry;  (2)  blasphemy;  (3)  murder; 
(4)  incest;  (5)  stealing;  (6)  perverting  justice.  These  were 
enjoined  by  Noah,  who  added  a  seventh,  prohibiting  the 
eating  of  flesh  with  blood/ 

1  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  2 ;   1  Enoch  vii.  1.        ••*.*.  the  Nephilim. 

•  Text  probably  corrupt. 

w  Cf.  1  Kings  xxi.  20  (phrase). 


*.'     ■••  ■*'  >/\    •  .'■*•■+■«<+ ^4*6%  4  H>*+ 


t"» 


XV 


5   J   chap,  vii]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  69 

shed  much  blood,1  and  the  earth  was  filled  with 
J  iniquity.1    24.  And  after  this  they  sinned  against  the 

beasts  and  birds,  and  all  that  moveth  and  walketh  on 
the  earth  :  8  and  much  blood  was  shed  on  the  earth,  and 
every  imagination  and  desire  of  men  imagined  vanity 
,  and  evil  continually.4  25.  And  the  Lord  destroyed 
everything  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth ;  5  because 
,  of  the  wickedness  of  their  deeds,  and  because  of  the 
blood  which  they  had  shed  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
He  destroyed  everything.  26.  "  And  we  were  left, 
I  •  and  you,  my  sons,  and  everything  that  entered 
with  us  into  the  ark,  and  behold  I  see  your  works  be- 
fore me  that  ye  do  not  walk  in  righteousness ;  for 
in  the  path  01  destruction  ye  have  begun  to  walk, 
and  ye  are  parting  one  from  another,  and  are  envious 
one  of  another,  and  (so  it  cometh)  that  ye  are  not  in 
harmony,  my  sons,  each  with  his  brother..  27.  For 
I  see,  and  behold  the  demons  have  begun  (their) 
seductions  against  you  and  against  your  children, 
and  now  I  fear  on  your  behalf,  that  after  my  death 
ye  will  shed  the  blood  of  men  upon  the  earth,  and 
that  ye,  too,  will  be  destroyed  from  the  face  of  the 
earth.7  28.  For  whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  and 
whoso  eateth  the  blood  of  any  flesh,  will  all  be 
destroyed  from  the  earth.8 

29.  And  there  will  not  be  left  any  man  that  eateth 
blood. 

Or  that  sheddeth  the  blood  of  man  on  the  earth, 

Nor  will  there  be  left  to  him  any  seed  or  descen- 
dants living  under  heaven ; 

For  into  Sheol  will  they  go, 

And  into  the  place  of  condemnation  will  they 
descend. 

1  Cf.  1  Enoch  ix.  I. 

■  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  11;    r  Enoch  ix.  9. 
3  Cf.  1  Enoch  vii.  5.  *  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  5. 

■  Cf.  Gen.  vi.  7,  vii.  4. 

•  Noah  is  the  speaker  here  and  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
7  Cf.  x.  1  (x.  1 -1 5  is  another  excerpt  from  the  Noah  apoca- 
lypse). 

■  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  4,  6;    Lev.  vii.  27. 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap.vii 

And  into  the  darkness  of  the  deep  will  they  all  be 
removed  by  a  violent  death.1  v 

30.  There  shall  be  no  blood  seen  upon  you  of  all  }• 
the  blood  there  shall  be  all  the  days  in  which  ye  have 
killed  any  beasts  or  cattle  or  whatever  flieth  upon  the 
earth,  and  work  ye  a  good  work  to  your  souls  by 
covering  that  which  hath  been  shed  ■  on  the  face  of  the 
earth,  jj.  And  ye  shall  not  be  like  him  who  eateth 
with  blood,  but  guard  yourselves  that  none  may  eat 
blood  befpre  you  :  *  cover  the  blood,  for  thus  have  I 
been  commanded  to  testify  to  you  and  your  children, 
together  with  all  flesh.  32.  And  suffer  not  the  soul 
to  be  eaten  with  the  flesh,  that  your  blood,  which  is 
your  life,  may  not  be  required  at  the  hand  of  any  flesh 
that  sheddeth  (it)  on  the  earth.4  33.  For  the  earth  will 
not  be  clean  from  the  blood  which  hath  been  shed  upon 
it ;  5  for  (only)  through  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it  * 
will  the  earth  be  purified  throughout  all  its  genera- 
tions. 34.  And  now,  my  children,  hearken  :  work 
judgment  and  righteousness  that  ye  may  be  planted 
in  righteousness  '  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth, 
and  your  glory  lifted  up  before  my  God,  who  saved 
me  from  the  waters  of  the  flood.1  35.  And  behold, 
ye  will  go  and  build  for  yourselves  cities,  and  plant 
in  them  all  the  plants  that  are  upon  the  earth,  and 
moreover  all  fruit-bearing  trees.  36.  For  three  years 
the  fruit  of  everything  that  is  eaten  will  not  be 
gathered :  and  in  the  fourth  year  its  fruit  will  be 
accounted  holy  [and  they  will  offer  the  first-fruits] ,• 

1  Cf.  xxii.  22 ;    1  Enoch  ciii.  7,  8.  "  ' 

•  Cf.  Lev.  xvii.  13;  Ezek.  xxiv.  7  (here  the  precept  if 
carried  back  to  Noah). 

•  One  of  the  seven  Noachic  laws  (binding  on  all  men)  was 
the  prohibition  of  eating  flesh  with  the  blood.  Cf.  note  on 
2i  above.  *  Cf.  Gen.  ix.  4;  Lev.  xvii.  10,  u,  14. 

•  Cf.  vi.  2.  •  Cf.  Num.  xxxv.  33. 
7  A  frequent  metaphor  in  the  O.T.    Israel  is  "  the  plant 

of  righteousness  "  (x  Enoch  x.  16,  etc.). 

•  Cf.  2  Pet.  ii.  5. 

•  These  words,  if  genuine,  direct  that  in  the  fourth  year 
only  the  first-fruits  (not  all  the  fruit)  are  to  be  offered  to 
God.    Cf.  Lev.  xix.  23-24. 


f 


chap,  vii]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  71 

acceptable  before  the  Most  High  God,  who  created 
heaven  and  earth  and  all  things.  Let  them  offer  in 
abundance  the  first  of  the  wine  and  oil  (as)  first-fruits 
on  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  who  receiveth  it,  and  what 
is  left  let  the  servants  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  l  eat 
before  the  altar  which  receiveth  (it).  37.  And  in  the 
fifth  year  * 

make  ye  the  release  so  that  ye  release  it  s  in  right- 
eousness and  uprightness,  and  ye  shall  be  righteous, 
and  all  that  you  plant  will  prosper.  38.  For  thus 
did  Enoch,  the  father  of  your  father  command 
Methuselah,  his  son,  and  Methuselah  his  son  Lamech, 
and  Lamech  commanded  me  all  the  things  which  his 
fathers  commanded  him.  39.  And  I  also  will  give 
you  commandment,  my  sons,  as  Enoch  commanded 
his  son  in  the  first  jubilees  :  whilst  still  living,  the 
^pvpfltM  jn  hi«;  gpnppat'^D,  he  commanded  and  testi- 
fied to  his  son  and  to  his  sons'  sons  until  the  day  of 
his  death." 

Genealogy  of  the  Descendants  of  Shem  :  Noah 
and  his  Sons  divide  the  Earth  (viii.  1-30; 
cf.  Gen.  x.). 

VIII.  In  the  twenty-ninth  jubilee,  in  the  first  week, 
in  the  beginning  thereof  Arpachshad  took  to  himself 
a  wife  and  her  name  was  RasijJLjJu  [the  daughter  of 
Susan,]  the  daughter  of  ElamTand  she  bare  him  a  son 
in  the  third  year  in  this  week,  and  he  called  his  name 
Kainam.5    2.  And  the  son  grew,  and  his  father  taught 

.  1  i.  e.  the  priests.  Later  Judaism  directed  that  the  rest 
of  the  fruit  should  be  eaten  by  the  owners  within  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem.  The  view  of  the  text  is  supported  by  the 
Samaritans,  the  Karaite  Jews  and  Ibn  Ezra. 

•  Charles  suspects  a  lacuna  in  the  text  here. 

•  Or  render  "  (In  the  seventh  year)  ye  will  let  it  (the  land) 
rest  and  lie  fallow"  (Charles). 

4  Cf.  1  Enoch  lx.  8,  xciii.  3;    Jude  14. 

•  This  name  occurs  in  the  LaX  of  Gen.  xi.  13,  but  not  in 
the  MT  or  other  Versions.  It  also  occurs  in  the  genealogy  in 
Luke  iii.  36. 


72  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vm 

him  writing,  and  he  went  to  seek  for  himself  a  place 
where  he  might  seize  for  himself  a  city.     3.  And  he 
found    a   writing   which    former    (generations)    had 
carved  on  the  rock,  and  he  read  what  was  thereon, 
and  he  transcribed  it  and  sinned  owing  to  it ;  for  it 
contained  the  teaching  of  the  Watchers  in  accordance 
with  which  they  used  to  observe  the  omens  of  the  sun 
and  moon  and  stars  in  all  the  signs  of  heaven.1    4. 
And  he  wrote  it  down  and  said  nothing  regarding  it ; 
for  he  was  afraid  to  speak  to  Noah  about  it  lest  he 
should  be  angry  with  him  on  account  of  it.     5.  And 
in  the  thirtieth  jubilee,  in  the  second  week,  in  the 
1 429  a.m.  first  year  thereof,  he  took  to  himself  a  wife,  and  her 
name  was  MSlka^  the  daughter  of  Madai.  the  son  of 
1432  a.m.  Japheth,  and  in  the  tourth  year  he  begat  a  son,  and 
called  his  name  Shelah ;  ■    for  he  said  :    "  Truly  I 
have  been  sent."  8     6.  [And  in  the  fourth  year  he 
was  born],  and  Shelah  grew  up  and  took  to  himself 
a  wife,  and  her  name  was  Mu'ak.  the^daughter  of 
KfiS&j  his  father's  brother,  in  the  one  and  "Ihirtieth- 
1499  A.M.  jubilee,  in  the  fifth  week,  in  the  first  year  thereof. 
7.  And  she  bare  him  a  son  in  the  fifth  year  thereof, 
and  he  called  his  name  Eber :  and  he  took  unto  him- 
1503  a.m.  self  a  wife,  and  her  name  was  'Azurad,4  the  daughter 
1564  a.m.  ofNebr6d,  in  the  thirty-second  Jubilee,  in  the  seventh 
week,  irftne  third  year  thereof.     8.  And  in  the  sixth 
1567  A.M.  year  thereof,  she  bare  him  a  son,  and  he  called  his 
name  Peleg;  for  in  the  days  when  he  was  born  the 
children  of  Noah  began  to  divide  the  earth  amnngst 
themselves  :  for  this  reason  Re  called  his  name  Peleg.6 
9.  And  they  divided  (it)  secretly  •  amongst  themselves, 

1  Cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  i.  2,  3,  who  assigns  this  wisdom  not 
to  the  Watchers,  but  to  the  children  of  Seth. 
■  Cf.  Gen.  x.  24. 

•  A  paronomasia  is  implied  in  the  original  Hebrew  here. 

•  Read  'Aztrd. 

6  There  is  a  play  (in  the  original  Hebrew)  on  the  meaning 
of  the  name  Peleg  here. 

•  The  secret  division  of  the  earth  is  followed  by  an  authori- 
tative one  by  Noah,  and  made  binding  on  his  descendants, 
Canaan  is  included  in  Shem's  lot.     Hence,  the  Israelite  con- 


;.   f 


chap,  vni]    THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  73 

and  told  it  to  Noah.  10.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the 
beginning  of  the  thirty-third  jubilee  that  they  divided 
the  earth  into  three  parts,  for  Shem  and  flam  and 
Japheth,  according  to  the  inheritance  of  each,  in  the 
first  year  in  the  first  week,  when  one  of  us,1  who  had 
been  sent,  was  with  them.  11.  And  he  called  his 
sons,  and  they  drew  nigh  to  him,  they  and  their 
children,  and  he  divided  the  earth  into  the  lots, 
which  his  three  sons  were  to  take  in  possession,  and 
they  reached  forth  their  hands,  and  took  the  writing 
out  of  the  bosom  of  Noah,  their  father.  12.  And. 
there  came  forth  on  the  writing  as  Shem's  lot  *  the 
middle  of  the  earth  8  which  he  should  take  as  an 
inheritance  for  himself  and  for  his  sons  for  the  genera-V 
tions  of  eternity,  from  the  middle  of  the  mountain! 
range  of  Rafa,4  from  the  mouth  of  the  water  from  the\ 
river  Tina,8  and  his  portion  goeth  towards  the  west 
through  the  midst  of  this  river,  and  it  extendeth  till  it 
reacheth  the  water  of  the  abysses,  out  of  which  this 
river  goeth  forth  and  poureth  its  waters  into  the  sea 
M£'at,6  and  this  river  rfoweth  into  the  great  sea.  And 
all  that  is  towards  the  north  is  Japheth's,  and  all  that 
is  towards  the  south  belongeth  to  Shem.  13.  And  it 
extendeth  till  it  reacheth  gaiflsfllL1  this  is  in  the  bosom 
of  the  tongue 8  which  looketh  towards  the  south.     14. 

quest  later  is  justified.    Noah's,   djyioinn   nf  thf*   earth   ;t — 


alluded  tojnj?jfke  de  R.  Eliezer  xxiii 
"*"  *  t.  B.  oueof  the  arigefe 

1  For  the  countries  included  in  Shem's  lot,  see  21,  ix.  2-6, 
136.  According  to  Epiphanius  it  extended  from  Persia  and 
Bactria  to  India,  to  Rhinocurura  (between  Egypt  and 
Palestine). 

8  According  to  Ezek.  xxxviii.  12  (1  Enoch  xxvi.  1)  Palestine 
was  the  "  navel  "  of  the  earth. 

*  Probably  the  Rhipaean  mountains  (identified  sometimes 
with  the  Ural  mountains). 

•  i.e.  the  river  Tanais  or  Don. 

*  i.e.  the  Maeotis  or  Sea  of  Azov. 

T  i.e.  (?)  the  Rhinocurura  (  =  "the  torrent  of  Egypt") 
on  the  confines  of  Egypt  and  Palestine  (Charles) ;  cf.  Isa. 
xxvii.  12. 

•  i.e.  either  promontory  of  land,  or  bay.   „ 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vm 

And  his  portion  extendeth  along  the  great  sea,  and  it 
extendeth  in  a  straight  line  till  it  reacheth  the  west  of 
the  tongue  which  looketh  towards  the  south  ; l  for  this 
sea  is  named  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  Sea.2  15.  And 
it  turneth  from  here  towards  the  south  towards  the 
mouth  of  the  great  sea  8  on  the  shore  of  (its)  waters, 
and  it  extendeth  to  the  west  to  '  Af  ra,*  and  it  extendeth 
till  it  reacheth  the  waters  of  the  river  Gihon,  and  to 
the  south  of  the  waters  of  Gihon,*  to  the  banks  of 
this  river.  16.  And  it  extendeth  towards  the  east,  till 
it  reacheth  the  Garden  of  Eden,  to  the  south  thereof, 
[to  the  south]  and  from  the  east  of  the  whole  land  of 
Eden  and  of  the  whole  east,  it  turneth  to  the  feast,!  * 
and  proceedeth  till  it  reacheth  the  east  of  the  mountain 
named  Rafa,  and  it  descendeth  to  the  bank  of  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Tina.  17.  This  portion  came  forth 
by  lot  for  Shem  and  his  sons,  that  they  should  possess 
it  for  ever  unto  his  generations  for  evermore.  18. 
And  Noah  rejnirrd  that  thi^  p^rti^p  ^?m»  fr)rjiifnr 

lthaTTTe-* 


"and  for  hig  son*;  and  he  remembered  all 
had  spoken  with  his  mouth  in  prophecy ;   for  he  had 
said : 

"  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Shem, 
And  may  the  Lord  dwell  in  the  dwelling  of 
Shem/' 7 

19.  And  he  knew  that  the  Garden  of  Eden  is  the 
holy  of  holies,  and  the  dwelling  of  the  Lord,  and 
Mount  Sinai  the  centre  of  the  desert,  and  Mount 
Zion — the  centre  of  the  navel  of  the  earth  :  these 
three 8  were  created  as  holy  places  facing  each  other. 

20.  And  he  blessed  the  God  of  gods,  who  had  put  the 
word  of  the  Ldrd  into  his  mouth,  and  the  Lord  for 
evermore.     21.  And  he  knew  that  a  blessed  portion 

1  i.t.  (?)  the  promontory  on  which  Mt.  Sindi  is  situated. 

•  *'.  e.  the  Gull  of  Akaba;    cf.  Isa.  xi.  15. 

•  ?  the  northern  waters  of  the  Red  Sea. 

•  i.  e.  Africa  in  the  restricted  6ense  of  the  Roman  province 
which  included  Egypt  and  the  other  northern  parts  of  Africa 
bordering  the  Mediterranean. 

•  i.  e.  the  Nile.  •    ?  read  "  west."  '  Cf.  vii.  11. 

•  These  three  holy  places  fall  within  ^hern's  lot. 


•  w4**. 


chap,  vin]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  75 

and  a  blessing  had  come  to  Shem  and  his  sons  unto 
the  generations  for  ever — the  whole  land  of  Eden' 
and  the  whole  land  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  whole 
land  of  the  east,  and  India,  and  on  the  Red  Sea  and 
the  mountains  thereof,  and  all  the  land  of  Bashan,  and 
all  the  land  of  Lebanon  and  the  islands  of  Kaftur,1 
and  all  the  mountains  of  Sanir  *  and  'Amana,8  and 
the  mountains  of  Asshur  in  the  north,  and  all  the 
land  of  Elam,  Asshur,  and  Babel,  and  Sflsan  and 
Ma'gdai,4  and  all  the  mountains  of  Ararat,  and  all 
the  region  beyond  the  sea,  which  is  beyond  the 
mountains  of  Asshur  towards  the  north,  a  blessed 
and  spacious  land,  and  all  that  is  in  it  is  very  good. 
22. 5  And  for  Ham  came  forth  the  second  portion, 
beyond  the  Gihon  towards  the  south  to  the  right  ■  of 
the  Garden,  and  it  extendcth  towards  the  south  and  it 
extendeth  to  all  the  mountains  of  fire,7  and  it  extendeth 
towards  the  west  to  the  sea  of  'Atel 8  and  it  extendeth 
towards  the  west  till  it  reacheth  the  sea  of  Ma'uk  • — 
that  (sea)  into  which  feverything  which  is  not  de- 
stroyed descendethj.10  23.  And  it  goeth  forth  towards 
the  north  to  the  limits  of  Gadir,11  and  it  goeth  forth  to 
the  coast  of  the  waters  of  the  sea  to  the  waters  of  the 
great  sea  till  it  draweth  near  to  the  river  Gihon,  and 
goeth  along  the  river  Gihon  till  it  reacheth  the  right  of 
the  Garden  of  Eden.  24.  And  this  is  the  land  which 
came  forth  for  Ham  as  the  portion  which  he  was  to 
occupy  for  ever  for  himself  and  his  sons  unto  their 

I  ?   Crete.     The  ancient  Versions   identify  Caphtor  with 
Cappadocia. 

■  i.  e.  Senir  (Deut.  iii.  9;    Etek.  xxvii.  5)  =  Hermon. 

?  Mt.  Amanus  in  N.  Syria. 

t.  e.  Media;   cf.  x.  35. 

22-24  &ve  details  of  Ham's  portion,  which  includes  all 
Africa  and  certain  parts  of  Asia. 

I.  e.  to  the  south. 

Cf.  1  Enoch  xviii.  6—9,  xxiv.  1-3. 

♦  .  *.  the  Atlantic. 

?  The  great  ocean  stream  in  the  extreme  west. 

The  text  may  be  corrupt.  Render,  perhaps,  "  if  any 
thing  descends  into  it,  it  perishes  "  (Charles). 

II  t.  e.  Cadiz. 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  vm 

generations  for  ever.  25. 1  And  for  Japheth  came 
forth  the  third  portion  beyond  *  the  river  Tina  ■  to  the 
north  of  the  outflow  of  its  waters,  and  it  extendeth 
north-easterly  to  the  whole  region  of  Gog4  and  to 
all  the  country  east  thereof.  26.  And  it  extendeth 
northerly  to  the  north,  and  it  extendeth  to  the  moun- 
tains of  Qelt  *  towards  the  north,  and  towards  the 
sea  of  Ma'uk,  and  it  goeth  forth  to  the  east  of  Gadir 
as  far  as  the  region  of  the  waters  of  the  sea.  27.  And 
it  extendeth  until  it  approacheth  the  west  of  Fara  • 
and  it  returneth  towards  'Affirag,7  and  it  extendeth 
easterly  to  the  waters  of  the  sea  of  Mft'at.8  28.  And 
it  extendeth  to  the  region  of  the  river  Tina  in  a  north- 
easterly direction  until  it  approacheth  the  boundary 
of  its  waters  towards  the  mountain  Rafa,9  and  it 
turneth  round  towards  the  north.  2Q.  This  is  the  land 
which  came  forth  for  Japheth  and  his  sons  as  the 
portion  of  his  inheritance  which  he  should  possess 
tor  himself  and  his  sons,  for  their  generations  for 
ever;  five  great  islands,10  and  a  great  land  in  the 
north.  30.  But  it  is  cold,  and  the  land  of  Ham  is 
hot,  and  the  land  of  Shem  is  neither  hot  nor  cold,  but 
it  is  of  blended  cold  and  heat. 

Subdivision  of  the  Three  Portions  amongst  the 
Grandchildren :  Oath  taken  by  Noah's 
Sons  (ix.  1-15 ;  cf.  Gen.  x.  partly). 

IX.  And  Ham  divided  amongst  his  sons,  and  the 
first  portion  came  forth  for  Cush  ll  towards  the  east, 
and  to  the  west  of  him  for  Mizraim,1*  and  to  the  west 

1  25-290  Japheth 's  portion  (N.  Asia,  Europe,  five  great 
islands) ;    cf.  ix.  7-13. 

1  Japheth 's  portion  is  elaborately  described  in  Josephus, 
Ant.  i.  6,  1.  ,  / 

•  i.  e.  the  river  Don.  * 

4  In  N.  Asia.     Josephus  identifies  Gog  with  the  Scythians. 

•  Qilt  =  probably  the  Celts.        •  ?  Africa.       T  ?  Phrygia. 

•  i.  e.  the  Sea  of  Azov  (see  viii.  12  above). 

•  ?  the  Ural  mountains  (cf.  viii.  12  above). 

10  Including,  probably,  Cyprus,  Sicily,  Sardinia,  Corsica.  ., 
u  -,  Ethiopia.  "  i.  $.  Egypt. 


9    1 


chap.  IX]      THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  77 

of  him  for  Put,1  and  to  the  west  of  him  [and  to  the 
west  thereof]  on  the  sea  *  for  Canaan.8     2.  And  Shem 
also  divided  amongst  his  sons,  and  the  first  portion 
>•  came  forth  for  Elam  and  his  sons,  to  the  east  of  the 

the  river  Tigris  till  it  approacheth  the  east,  the  whole 
land  of  India,  and  on  the  Red  Sea  on  its  coast,  and 
-the. waters  of  D£dan,  and  all  the  mountains  of  Mebri 
and  '£la,  and  all  the  land  of  Susan  and  all  that  is 
on  the  side  of  Pharnak  4  to  the  Red  Sea  and  the  river 
Tina.  3.  And  for  Asshur  came  forth  the  second 
/  portion,   all   the  land   of  Asshur  and   Nineveh  and 

r  bhinar  and  to  the  border  of  India,  and  it  ascendeth  and 

skirteth  the  river.     4.  And  for  Arpachshad  came  forth 
the  third  portion,  all  the  land  of  the  region  of  the 
Chaldees  io  the  east  of  the  Euphrates,  bordering  on 
lV  the  Red  Sea,  and  all  the  waters  of  the  desert  close  to 

r  '  the  tongue  of  the  sea  which  looketh  towards! Egypt, 
all  the  land  of  Lebanon  and  Sanfr  and  'Amana  8  to 
the  border  of  the  Euphrates.  5.  And  for  Aram  e  there 
came  forth  the  fourth  portion,  all  the  land  of  Mesopo- 
tamia between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  to  the 
north  of  the  Chaldees  to  the  border  of  the  mountains 
of  Asshur  and  the  land  of  'Arara.7  6.  And  there 
came  forth  for  Lud8  the  fifth  portion,  the  mountains 
of  Asshur  and  all  appertaining  to  them  till  it  reacheth 
^  *  -.  the  Great  Sea,  and  till  it  reacheth  the  east  of  Asshur 

his  brother.  7.  And  Japheth  also  divided  the  land 
of  his  inheritance  amongst  his  sons.  8.. And  the 
first  portion  came  forth  for  Gomer  to  the  east  from 
the  north  side  to  the  river  Tina;  and  in  che  north 
there  came  forth  for  Magog  all  the  inner  portions  of 
the  north  until  it  reacheth  to  the  sea  of  M6'at.    9    And 

/  *  i.  9.  Libya  (west  of  Egypt). 

*  *.  §.  the  Atlantic.     Fqr  Canaan's  portion  (from  Libya  to 
the  Atlantic]  cf.  x.  28-29. 

•  For  1  cf.  Gen.  x.  6. 

4    ?  Pharnacia  on  the  coast  of  Pontus  (Charles). 

*  Cf.  viii.  21.  •  t.  e.  the  Syrians. 
T  Ararat;   cf.  viii.  21. 

•  According  to  Josephus  the  descendants  of  Lud  were  the 
Lydians. 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  ix 

for  Madai  came  forth  as  his  portion  that  he  should 
possess  from  the  west  of    his  two  brothers  to  the 
islands,1  and  to  the  coasts  of  the  islands.     10.  And  for 
Javan  *  came  forth  the  fourth  portion  every  island  • 
and  the  islands  which  are  towards  the  border  of  Lud. 
II.  And  for  Tubal  *  there  came  forth  the  fifth  portion 
in  the  midst  of  the  tongue  which  approacheth  towards 
the  border  of  the  portion  of  Lud  to  the  second  tongue, 
to  the  region  beyond  the  second  tongue  unto  the  third 
tongue.6     12.  And  for  Meshech  came  forth  the  sixth 
portion,   all   the  region   beyond  the  third  tongue  • 
till  it  approacheth  the  east  of  Gadir.7     13.  And  for 
Tiras  ■  there  came  forth  the  seventh  portion,  four 
great  islands  •  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  which  reach 
to  the  portion  of  Ham  [and  the  islands  of  Kamaturi 
came  out  by  lot  for  the  sons  of  Arpachshad  as  his 
inheritance].10     14.  And   thus    the    sons    of    Noah 
divided   unto   their  sons  in  the  presence  of   Noah 
their  father,  and  he  bound  them  all  by  an  oath, 
imprecating  a  curse  on  every  one  that  sought  to  seize 
the  portion  which  had  not  fallen   (to  him)   by  his 
lot.     15.  And  they  all  said,  "So  be  it ;    so  be  it," 
for  themselves  and  their  sons  for  ever  throughout 
their  generations  till  the  day  of  judgment,  on  which 
the  Lord  God  shall  judge  them  with  a  sword  and  with 
fire,  for  all  the  unclean  wickedness  of  their  errors, 
wherewith  they  have  filled  the  earth  with  transgression 
and  uncleanness  and  fornication  and  sin. 

1  Including  ( ?)  Britain  and  Ireland. 

•  i.e.  properly  Ionia  (so  Isa.  lxvi.  19;  Ezek.  xxvii.  13)  : 
but  in  Daniel  (viii.  21,  x.  20,  xi.  2)  it  =  the  Graeco-Mace- 
donian  Empire.  Here  it  seems  to  embrace  all  the  islands 
off  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor. 

•  ?  coastland. 

•  Tubal's  portion  apparently  extends  from  Thrace  to  Italy. 
'  The  three  tongues  of  land  may  be  Thrace,  Greece  and  Italy. 
■  i.  e.  probably  Italy.  T  1.  e.  Cadiz. 

•  The  descendants  of  Tiras  may  have  been  the  Tyrseni,  a 
branch  of  the  Pelasgians. 

•  Cf.  viii.  29. 

M  The  bracketed  words  are  probably  an  interpolation 
(Charles).     Arpachsad  was  a  son  of  Shem.  •*• 


•*v*ift4r<  1 


f 


Chap.x]     Th£  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  79 


Noah's  Sons  led  astray  by  Evil  Spirits  ;  Noah's 
Prayer ;  Mastema  ;  Death  of  Noah  (x.  1-17 ; 
cf.  Gen.  ix.  28). 

X.1  And  in  the  third  week  of  this  jubilee  the  unclean 
demons  ■  began  to  lead  astray  fthe  children  off  s  the 
sons  of  Noah,  and  to  make  to  err  and  destroy  them. 
2.  And  the  sons  of  Noah  came  to  Noah  their  father, 
and  they  told  him  concerning  the  demons  which 
were  leading  astray  and  blinding  and  slaying  his 
sons'  sons.  3.  And  he  prayed  before  the  Lord  his 
God,  and  said  : 

"  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,4  who  hast  shown 
mercy  unto  me, 
And  hast  saved  me  and  my  sons  from  the  waters 

of  the  flood, 
And  hast  not  caused  me  to  perish  as  Thou  didst 
the  sons  of  perdition ;  * 

For  Thy  grace  hath  been  great  towards  me, 
And  great  hath  been  Thy  mercy  to  my  soul ; 

Let  Thy  grace  be  lift  up  upon  my  sons, 
And  let  not  wicked  spirits  rule  over  them 
Lest  they  should  destroy  them  from  the  earth. 

4.  But  do  Thou  bless  me  and  my  sons,  that  we  may 
increase    and    multiply    and    replenish    the    earth. 

5.  And  Thou  knowest  how  Thy  Watchers,  the  fathers 
of  these  spirits,  acted  in  my  day  :  and  as  for  these 
spirits  which  are  living,  imprison  them  and  hpld 
them  fast  in  the  place  of  condemnation,  and  let  them 
not  bring  destruction  on  the  sons  of  thy  servant, 
my  God ;    for  these  are  malignant,  and  created  in 

1  Here  we  have  (in  x.  1-15)  another  fragment  of  the  lost 
Apocalypse  of  Noah  (as  in  vii.  20-39).  The  Hebrew  original 
of  1-2  and  9-14  of  this  section  is  extant. 

1  ».  e.  the  spirits  which  issued  from  the  children  of  the 
angels  and  the  daughters  of  men. 

•  Omit  tht  children  of. 

4  Cf.  Num.  xvi.  22,  xxvii.  16. 

•  Cf.  2  Thess.  ii.  3. 


80        s      THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  x 

order  to  destroy.  6.  And  let  them  not  rule  over  the 
spirits  of  the  living ;  for  Thou  alone  canst  exercise 
dominion  over  them.  And  let  them  not  have  power 
over  the  sons  of  the  righteous  from  henceforth  and  for 
evermore."  7.  And  the  Lord  our  God  bade  us  to 
bind  all.1  8.  And  the  chief  of  the  spirits,  Mastfima,1  '  ,  t1 
came  and  said  :  "  Lord,  Creator,  let  some  of  them  '  •  ■•' 
remain  before  me,  arid  let  them  hearken  to  my  voice, 
and  do  all  that  I  shall  say  unto  them ;  for  if  some  of 
them  are  not  left  to  me,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  execute 
the  power  of  my  will  on.  the  sons  of  men  ;  for  these  are 
for  corruption  and  leading  astray  before  my  judg-  , 

ment,  for  great  is  the  wickedness  of  the  sons  of  men." 
9.  And  He  said  :  "  Let  the  tenth  part  of  them 
remain  before  him,  and  let  nine  parts  descend  into 
the  place  of  condemnation." 8  10.  And  one  of  us  4 
He  commanded  that  we  should  teach  Noah  all  their 
medicines ;  for  He  knew  that  they  would  not  walk  in  ■ 
uprightness,  nor  strive  in  righteousness,  n.  And 
we  did  according  to  all  His  words  :  all  the  malignant 
evil  ones  we  bound  in  the  place  of  condemnation, 
and  a  tenth  part  of  them  we  left  that  they  might  be 
subject  before  Satan  *  on  the  earth.  12.  And  we 
explained  to  Noah  all  the  medicines  of  their  diseases, 
together  with  their  seductions,  how  he  might  heal 
them  with  herbs  of  the  earth.  13.  AndNoath  wrote 
down  all  things  in  a  book  as  we  instructed  him  con- 
cerning   every    kind   of    medicine.    Thus    the    evil 

1  Cf.  1  Enoch  x.  4,  12. 

*  The  word  apparently  ■■  ma$tifn  (Hif.  part  of  $itam), 
"to  be  adverse,  "inimical";  the  Heb.  noun  ma$tem&  s= 
"  animosity,"  in  Hos.  ix.  7,  8.  Thus  the  word  ■=  Satan 
("  adversary  ").  As  a  proper  name  it  is  practically  confined 
to  the  Jubilees-literature.  The  evil  spirits  under  the  guidance 
of  Mast£ma  tempt,  accuse  and  destroy  men. 

*  Only  one-tenth  are  permitted  to  act  freely  against  man- 
kind till  the  Day  of  Judgment;  but  in  1  Enoch  xv^-xvi.  all 
the  demons  are  allowed  to  do  this. 

*  The  angel  Raphael  is  referred  to,  as  is  shown  by  the 
Hebrew  Book  of  Noah.  For  Raphael  in  this  connection  cf. 
Tobit  iii.  17,  xii.  14,  15. 

*  Thus  Satan  and  Mastema  are  identical. 


&r 


CHAP.x]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  81 

spirits  were  precluded  from  (hurting)  the  sons  of 
Noah.  14.  And  he  gave  all  that  he  had  written  to 
Shprtli  his  eldest  son;  for  he  loved  hjm  p.xr.pe^jngly 
above  all  his  sons.  15.  And  Noah  slept  ( with  his 
fathers,  and  was  buried  on  Mount  Lubar  in  the  land 
of  Ararat.  16.  Nine  hundred  and  fifty  years  he 
completed  in  his  life,  nineteen  jubilees  and  two  > 
weeks  and  five  years.  17.  And  in  his  life  on  earth  he 
excelled  the  children  of  men  save  Enoch  because  of  the 
righteousness,  wherein  he  was  perfect.  For  Enoch's 
office  was  ordained  for  a  testimony  to  the  genera- 
tions of  the  world,1  so  that  he  should  recount  all  the 
deeds  of  generation  unto  generation,  till  the  day  of 
judgment. 

The  Tower  o!  Babel  and  the  Confusion  of 
Tongues  (x.  1&-27;  cf.  Gen.  xi.  1-9). 

18.  And  in  the  three  and  thirtieth  jubilee,  in  the  first 
year  in  the  second  week,  Peleg  took  to  himself  a  wife, 
whose  name  was  L6rmijLJ}ieLjiaji^^ 
and  she  bare  him  a  son  in  the  fourth  year  of  this 
week,  and  he  called  his  name  Reu ;  ■  for  he  said  : 
11  Behold  the  children  of  men  have  become  evil s 
through  the  wicked  purpose  of  building  for  themselves 
a  city  and  a  tnwpr  jp  the  land  of  Shinar."  19.  For 
they  departed  from  the  land  of  Ararat  eastward  to 
Shinar;  for  in  his  days  they  built  the  city  and  the 
tower,  saying,  "  Go  to,  let  us  ascend  thereby  into 
heaven."  *  20.  And  they  began  to  build,  and  in 
the  fourth  week  they  made  brick  with  fire,  and  the 
bricks  served  them  for  stone,  and  the  clay 5  with  which 
they  cemented  them  together  was  asphalt  which 
cometh  out  of  the  sea,  and  out  of  the  fountains  of 
water  in  the  land  of  Shinar.  21.  And  they  built  it  : 
forty  and   three   years  were   they   building  it ;.    its  i 

1  Cf.  iv.  24.  ■  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  18. 

•  There  is  a  play  00  the  name  Reu  in  Hebrew  here  {re' A 
.   .   .  ra&). 
4  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  4.  •  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  3. 

F 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  x 

breadth  was  203  bricks,  and  the  height  (of  a  brick) 
was  the  third  of  one;  its  height  amounted  to  5433 
cubits  and  2  palms,  and  (the  extent  of  one  wall 
was)  thirteen  stades  (and  of  the  other  thirty  stades). 
22.  And  the  Lord  our  God  said  unto  us  :  "  Behold, 
they  are  one  people,  and  (this)  they  begin  to  do,  and 
now  nothing  will  be  withholden  from  them.  Go  to, 
let  us  go  -down  and  confound  their  language,  that 
they  may  not  understand  one  another's  speech/ 
and  they  may  be  dispersed  into  cities  and  nations, 
and  one  purpose  will  no  longer  abide  with  them  till 
the  day  of  judgment."  23.  And  the  Lord  descended, 
and  we  descended  with  Him  to  see  the  city  and  the 
tower  which  the  children  of  men  had  built.  24.  And 
He  confounded  their  language,  and  they  no  longer 
understood  one  another's  speech,  and  they  ceased 
then  to  build  the  city  and  the  tower.  25.  For  this 
reason  the  whole  land  of  Shinar  is  called  Babel,  be- 
cause the  Lord  did  there  confound  all  the  language  of 
the  children  of  men,  and  from  thence  they  were  dis- 
persed *  into  their  cities,  each  according  to  his  language 
x  and  his  nation.1  26.  And  the  Lord  sent  a_jniglity» 
<Ra^-  whyii-again&t-4he-towfiX  and  overthrew  it  upon  the 
^A  '  earth,  and  behold  it  was  between  Asshur  and  Babylon 

in  the  laad-of  Shinar,  and  they  called  its  name  "  Over- 
1688 am    throw."  *    27.  In  the  fourth  week  in  the  first  year 
in  the  .beginning  thereof  in  the  four  and  thirtieth 
jubilee,  were  they  dispersed  from  the  land  of  Shinar,: 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  6  f .  ■  Cf.  Gen.  xl.  9. 

*  According  to   Jewish  tradition  seventy  nations  (under ' 
seventy  patron  angels)  were  thus  created. 

*  An  old  tradition ;  cf.  Sibyll.  Oracles  iii.  98-103 ;   Josephus, 
Ant.  i.  4.  3. 

*  A  play  on  the  preceding  verb  ("  overthrew  ").     But  its 
real  name  was  Babel. 


chap.x]     THE  BOOK  OF   JUBILEES  83 

The  Children  of  Noah  enter  their  Districts  ; 
Canaan  seizes  Palestine  wrongiully  ;  Ma- 
dai  receives  Media  (x.  28-36) 

28.  And  Ham  and  his  sons  went  into  the  land  which 
he  was  to  occupy,  which  he  acquired  as  his  portion 
in  the  land  of  the  south.1  29.  And  Canaan  saw  the 
land  of  Lebanon  to  the  river  of  Egypt  that  it  was  very 
good,  and  he  went  not  into  the  land  of  his  inheritance 
to  the  west  (that  is  to)  the  sea,2  and  he  dwelt  in  the 
land  of  Lebanon,  eastward  and  westward  from  the 
border  of  Jordan  and  from  the  border  of  the  sea.s 
30.  And  Ham,  his  father,  and  Cush  and  Mizraim,  his 
brothers,  said  unto  him  :  "  Thou  hast  settled  in  a 
land  which  is  not  thine,  and  which  did  not  fall  to  us 
by  lot  :  do  not  do  so ;  for  if  thou  dost  do  so,  thou  and 
thy  sons  will  fall  in  the  land  and  (be)  accursed  through 
sedition ;  for  by  sedition  ye  have  settled,  and  by 
sedition  Will  thy  children  fall,  and  thou  shalt  be  rooted 
out  for  ever.  31.  Dwell  not  in  the  dwelling  of  Shem  ; 
for  to  Shem  and  to  his  sons  did  it  come  by  their  lot. 

32.  Cursed  art  thou,  and  cursed  shalt  thou  be  beyond 
all  the  sons  of  Noah,  by  the  curse  *  by  which  we 
bound  ourselves  by  an  oath  in  the  presence  of  the 
holy  judge,8  and  in  the  presence  of  Noah  our  father." 

33.  But  he  did  not  hearken  unto  them,  and  dwelt 
in  the  land  of  Lebanon  from  Hamath  •  to  the  entering 
of  Egypt,7  he  and  his  sons  until  this  day.  34.  And 
for  this  reason  that  land  is  named  Canaan.  35.  And 
Japheth  and  his  sons  went  towards  the  sea  and  dwelt 
in  the  land  of  their  portion,  and  Madai  saw  the  land 
of  the  sea  and  it  did  not  please  him,  and  he  begged  a 
(portion)   from  Elam  and  Asshur  and  Arpachshad, 

1  "  South  "  should  be  "  north  "  here  :    N.  Africa  is  meant. 

*  i.  e.  N.-W.  Africa  (his  true  inheritance). 

'  Canaan  wrongfully  seized  Palestine,  which  belonged  by 
right  to  Arpachshad. 
4  Cf.  ix.  14,  15. 
1  i.  6.  the  angel  who  was  present  at  the  lot  (viii.  \o\. 

•  Hamath  marked  the  northern  boundary  of  Israel. 
7  The  extreme  south. 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  x 

his  wife's  brother,  and  he  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Media, 
near  to  his  wife's  brother  until  this  day.  36.  And 
he  called  his  dwelling-place,  and  the  dwelling-place 
of  his  sons,  Media,  after  the  name  of  their  father 
Madai. 

The  History  of  the  Patriarchs  from  Reu  to 
Abraham  (cf.  Gen.  xi,  20-30) ;  the  Corruption 
of  the  Human  Race  (xi.  1-15). 

1681  a.m.  XI.  And  in  the  thirty-fifth  jubilee,  in  the  third 
week,  in  the  first  year  thereof,  Reu  took  to  himself  a 
wife,  and  her  name  was  '6ra,  the^jjajighter^oIJillt* 
the  son  of  K£s£d,  and  she" bare  tiim  a  son,  and  he 

1687 a.m.  called  his  name  S&rdli,1  in  the  seventh  year  of  this 
week  in  this  jubilee.     2.*  And  the  sons  of  Noah  began 
I  to  war  on__garp  other,  t^Takp  raptive  and  to  slay 
\  each  ofherTand  to  *h?fl  *hf>  blood  ^  ™*n  nn  the  earth. 
ancTto  eat  Slood,  and  to  build  strong  cities,  and  walls, 
and  towers,  and  individuals  (began)  to  exalt  them- 
selves above  the  nation,*  and  to  found  the  beginnings 
of  kingdoms,  and  to  go  to  war  people  against  people, 
and  nation  against  nation,  and  city  against  city,  and 
all  (began)  to  do  evil,  and  to  acquire  arms,  and  to 
teach  their  sons  war,  and  they  began  to  capture 
'cities,  and  to  sell  male  and  female  slaves.     3.  And 
'Or,  the  son  of  K6s6d,4  built  the  city  of  'Ara  5  of  the 
Chaldees,  and  called  its  name  after  his  own  name  and 
the  name  of  his  father.     4.  And  they  made  for 
selves  molten  images,  and  they  worshipped  each  the 
idol,  the  molten  image  which  they  had  made  for 
\themselves,  and  they  began  to  make  graven  images 
ind  unclean  simulacra,  and  malignant  spirits  assisted 

1  Cf.  Gen,  xi.  20  f.  (MT.  has  Strug  for  SirSh). 

*  In  2-6  the  corruption  of  mankind  is  ascribed  to  the 
period  of  Serug. 

•  A  note  of  hostility  to  monarchy. 

*  The  place  name  Ur  Kasdxm  {"  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  ")  is 
here  transformed  into  the  names  of  two  persons,  after  whom 
the  city  is  named. 

•  i  .#.  Ur. 


■3.v*;?v'v. 


chap,  xi]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  85 

knd  seduced  (them)  into  committing  transgression 
land  uncleanness.  5.  And  the  prince  Maste'ma  exerted 
nimself  to  do  all  this,  and  he  sent  forth  other  spirits, 
those  which  were  put  under  his  hand,  to  do  all  manner 
of  wrong  and  sin,  and  all  manner  of  transgression,  to 
corrupt  and  destroy,  and  to  shed  blood  upon  the 
earth.1  6.  For  this  reason  he  called  the  name  of 
S6r6h,  Serug,  for  every  one  turned  to  do  all  manner  of 
sin  and  transgression.  7.  And  he  grew  up,  and 
dwelt  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  near  to  the  father  of  his 
wife's  mother,  and  he  worshipped  idols,  and  he  took 
to  himself  a  wife  in  the  thirty-sixth  jubilee,  in  the 
fifth  week,  in  the  first  year  thereof,  and  her  name  was 
Mglka,*  the  daughter  of  Kab6r,  the  daughter  of  his 
fathers  brother.  8.  And  she  bare  him  Nahor,  in 
the  first  year  of  this  week,  and  he  grew  and  dwelt  in 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and  his  father  taught  him  the 
researches  of  the  Chaldees  to  divine  and  augur, 
according  to  the  signs  of  heaven.  9.  And  in  the 
thirty-seventh  jubilee,  in  the  sixth  week,  in  the  first 
year  thereof,  he  took  to  himself  a  wife,  and  her  name 
was  'tjaska,8  the  daughter  of  Ne'stag  of  the  Chaldees. 
10.  And  she  bare  him  Terah  4~Tntrie  seventh  year 
of  this  week.  11.  And  the  prince  Maste'ma  sent 
ravens  and  birds  to  devour  the  seed  which  was  sown 
in  the  land,  in  order  to  destroy  the  land,  and  rob  the 
children  of  men  of  their  labours.  Before  they  could 
plough  in  the  seed,  the  ravens  picked  (it)  from  the 
surface  of  the  ground.  12.  And  for  this  reason  he 
called  his  name  Terah,  because  the  ravens  and  the 
birds  reduced  them  to  destitution  and  devoured  their 
seed.5  13.  And  the  years  began  to  be  barren,  owing 
to  the  birds,  and  they  devoured  all  the  fruit  of  the 

1  Cf.  1  Enoch  xvi. 

'  In  Gen.  xi.  29  Milcah  is  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Nahor, 
Abram'9  brother. 

1  =  Iscah  (cf.  Gen.  xi.  29;  but  there  8he  is  daughter  of 
Haran). 

4  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  24. 

8  Apparently  some  play  on  the  name  Terah  is  involved 
in  the  original  Hebrew,'  but  the  explanation  is  uncertain. 


86  _THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xi 

trees  Jrom  the  trees  :  it  was  only  with  great  effort 
that  they  could  save  a  little  of  all  the  fruit  of  the 

1 870  a.m.  earth  in  their  days.  14.  And  in  this  thirty-ninth 
jubilee,  in  the  second  week  in  the  first  year,  Terah 
took  to  himself  a  wife,  and  her  name  was  'fcdna/  the 
daughter  of  'AbramJ-the  daughter  of  his"  father's 

1876  a.m.  sister?  15.  And  in  the  seventh  year  of  this  week  she 
bare  him  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Abram,  by 
the  name  of  the  father  of  his  mother ;  for  he  had  died 
before  his  daughter  had  conceived  a  son.8 

Abram 's    Knowledge    of    God    and  wonderful 

Deeds  (xi.  16-24). 

16.  And  the  child  began  to  understand  the  errors 
of  the  earth  that  all  went  astray  after  graven  images 
and  after  uncleanness,  and  his  father  taught  him 
1 890  a.m.  writing,  and  he  was  two  weeks  of  years  old,  and  he 
separated  himself  from  his  father,4  that  he  might  not 
worship  idols  with  him.  17.  And  he  began  to  pray 
to  the  Creator  of  all  things  that  He  might  save  him 
from  the  errors  of  the  children  of  men,  and  that  his 
portion  should  not  fall  into  error  after  uncleanness  and 
vileness.  18.  And  the  seed  time  came  for  the  sowing 
of  seed  upon  the  land,  and  they  all  went  forth  together 
to  protect  their  seed  against  the  ravens,  and  Abram 
went  forth  with  those  that  went,  and  the  child  was  a 
lad  of  fourteen  years.  19.  And  a  cloud  of  ravens 
came  to  devour  the  seed,  and  Abram  ran  to  meet 
them  before  they  settled  on  the  ground,  and  cried  to 
them  before  they  settled  on  the  ground  to  devour  the 
seed,  and  said,  "  Descend  not  :    return  to  the  place 

1  According  to  the  Talmud  (Baba  bathra  gia)  her  name 
was  Amthelai,  daughter  of  Karnebo. 

*  i.  e.  the  grandfather  of  the  Biblical  Abram. 

1  It  was  customary  to  name  a  child  after  a  grandfather. 
Here  the  child's  name  apparently  perpetuates  the  memory 
of  a  grandfather  who  had  died  before  the  child  was  conceived. 

*  This  is  the  theme  of  much  later  Jewish  legend.  See 
especially  the  first  part  of  the  Apocalypse  of  Abraham,  an 
edition  of  which  appears  in  this  series.     Cf.  xii.  1-14  below. 


chap,  xi]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  87 

whence  ye  came,"  and  they  proceeded  to  turn  back. 
20.  And  he  caused  the  clouds  of  ravens  to  turn  back 
that  day  seventy  times,  and  of  all  the  ravens  through- 
out all  the  land  where  Abram  was  there  settled  there 
not  so  much  as  one.  21.  And  all  who  were  with  him 
throughout  all  the  land  saw  him  cry  out,  and  all 
the  ravens  turn  back,  and  his  name  became  great  in 
all  the  land  of  the  Chaldees.  22.  And  there  came 
to  him  this  year  all  those  that  wished  to  sow,  and  he 
went  with  them  until  the  time  of  sowing  ceased  : 
and  they  sowed  their  land,  and  that  year  they  brought 
enough  grain  home  and  ate  and  were  satisfied.  23. 
And  in  the  first  year  of  the  fifth  week  Abram  taught 
those  who  made  implements  for  oxen,  the  artificers 
in  wood,  and  they  made  a  vessel  above  the  ground, 
facing  the  frame  of  the  plough,1  in  order  to  put  the 
seed  thereon,  and  the  seed  fell  down  therefrom  upon 
the  share  of  the  plough,  and  was  hidden  in  the  earth, 
and  they  no  longer  feared  the  ravens.  24.  And 
after  this  manner  they  made  (vessels)  above  the 
ground  on  all  the  frames  of  the  ploughs,  and  they 
sowed  and  tilled  all  the  land,  according  as  Abram 
commanded  them,  and  they  no  longer  feared  the 
birds. 

Abram  seeks  to  convert  Terah  from  Idolatry  ; 
the  Family  of  Terah  (cf.  Gen.  xi.  27-30). 
Abram  burns  the  Idols.  Death  of  Haran 
(cf.  Gen.  xi.  28)  (xii.  1-14). 

XII.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth  week,  in  the 
seventh  year  thereof,  that  Abram  said  to  Terah  his 
father,  saying,  "  Father  1  "  And  he  said,  "  Behold, 
here  am  I,  my  son."     2.  And  he  said, 

1  An  improved  method  of  sowing  by  means  of  a  sced- 
scatterer  attached  to  the  plough  (Arab,  biik)  is  here  described. 
This  marked  an  advance  on  the  primitive  method  of  scatter- 
ing the  seed  by  hand,  and  its  invention  is  ascribed  to  Abraham. 
In  Rabbinical  tradition  Noah  is  the  inventor  of  the  plough 
and  kindred  instruments.  Cf.  Krauss,  Talmudische  Atchjo- 
ogxe,  ii.  553  (note  151). 


88  THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  xn 

"What  help  and  profit  have  we  from  those  idols 
which  thou  dost  worship, 
And  before  which  thou  dost  bow  thyself  ?  * 

3.  For  there  is  rio  spirit  in  them,2 

For  they  aire  dumb  forms,  and  a  misleading  of  the 

he.  art. 
Worship  them  not : 

4.  Worship  the  God  of  heaven, 

Who  causeth  the  rain  and  the  dew  to  descend  on  the 

earth,8 
And  doeth  everything  upon  the  earth, 

And  hath  created  everything  by  His  word,4 
•     And  all  life  is  from  before  His  face. 

5.  Why  do  ye  worship  things  that  have  no  spirit  in 

them? 
For  they  are  the  work  of  (men's)  hands,6 

And  on  your  shoulders  do  ye  bear  them,* 
And  ye  have  no  help  from  them, 

But  they  are  a  great  cause  of  shame  to  those  who 

make  them, 
And  a  misleading  of  the  heart  to  those  who  worship 

them  : 
Worship  them  not." 

6.  And  his  father  said  unto  him,  "  I  also  know  it, 
my  son,  but  what  shall  I  do  with  a  people  who  have 
made  me  to  serve  before  them  ?  7.  And  if  I  tell  them 
the  truth,  they  will  slay  me ;  for  their  soul  cleaveth 

1  In  1-14  we  have  an  early  form  of  the  legend  of  Abram's 
protest  against  idolatry.  This  section  has  remarkable 
parallels,  both  in  thought  and  expression,  with  chaps,  i.-viii. 
of  the  Apocalypse  of  Abraham.  In  the  later  (Rabbinic) 
forms  of  the  legend  Abram's  birth  excites  the  alarm  of 
Nimrod,  who  endeavours  to  destroy  him  in  a  furnace  of 
fire. 

a.  Cf.  Ps.  exxxv.  17.  •  Cf.  xx.  9;    Jer.  xiv.  22. 

4  Cf.  Ps.  xxxiii.  6;    Heb.  xi.  3 ;   2  Pet.  iii.  5;   4  Ezra  vi.  38. 

•  Cf.  Jer.  x.  3,  9. 

•  Cf-  Jsa.  xlvi.  7;   Jer.  x.  5;  Assumpt.  Moses,  viii.  4. 


chap,  xii]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  89 

to  them  to  worship  them  and  honour  them.  Keep 
silent,1  my  son,  lest  they  slay  thee."  8.  And  these 
words  he  spake  to  his  two  brothers,  and  they  were 
angry  with  him  and  he  kept  silent.  9.  And  in  the 
fortieth  jubilee,  in  the  second  week,  in  the  seventh  1925 
year  thereof,  Abram  took  to  himself  a  wife,  and  her 
name  was  Sarai,  the  daughter  of  his  father,  and  she 
became  his  wife.1  10.  And  Haran,  his  brother,  took 
to  himself  a  wife  in  the  third  year  of  the  third  week, 
and  she  bare  him  a  son  in  the  seventh  year  of  this  1932 
week  and  he  called  his  name  Lot.  11.  And  Nahor, 
his  brother,  took  to  himself  a  wife.8  12.  And  in  the 
sixtieth  year  of  the  life  of  Abram,  that  is,  in  the  J936 
fourth  week,  in  the  fourth  year  thereof,  Abram  arose 
by  night,  and  burned  the  house  of  the  idols,  and  he 
burned  all  that  was  in  the  house,  and  no  man  knew 
it.  13.  And  they  arose  in  the  night  and  sought  to 
save  their  gods  from  the  midst  of  the  fire.  14.  And 
Haran  hasted  to  save  them,  but  the  fire  flamed  over 
him,  and  he  was  burnt  in  the  fire,  and  he  died  in  Ur 
of  the  Chaldees  before  Terah  his  father,  and  they 
buried  him  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.4 

The    Family    of    Terah    in   Haran  ;    Abram 's 
Experiences  there  ;  his  Journey  to  Canaan 

(xii.  15-31 ;  cf.  Gen.  xi,  31-xii.  3).  * 

15.  And  Terah  went  forth  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees, 
he  and  his  sons,  to  go  into  the  land  of  Lebanon  and 
into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  he  dwelt  in  the  land  of 
Haran,  and  Abram,  dwelt  with  Terah  his  father  in 

1  In  Ap.  Abraham  Terah  is  indignant  with  Abraham  for 
deriding  the  idols. 

*  Cf.  Gen.  xx.  12,  according  to  which  Sarah  was  Abraham's 
half-sister.  According  to  Rabbinic  tradition  marriage  with 
half-sisters  on  the  father's  side  was  permitted  to  the  descen- 
dants of  Noah.  In  Lev.  xviii.  9,  II,  xx.  17,  marriage  with 
a  sister  or  half-sister  is  strictly  forbidden. 

*  According  to  Gen.  xi.  29,  Milcah. 

*  In  Ap.  Abraham,  viii.  the  fire  descends  from  heaven  and 
burns  the  house  and  all  in  it  (including  Terah).  Only  Abraham 
escapes. 


90  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xii 

Haran  two  weeks  of  years.1  16.  And  in  the  sixth 
1951  a.m.  week,  in  the  fifth  year  thereof,  Abram  sat  up  through- 
out the  night  on  the  new  moon  of  the  seventh  month 
to  observe  the  stars  from  the  evening  to  the  morning, 
in  order  to  see  what  would  be  the  character  of  the 
year  with  regard  to  the  rains,  and  he  was  alone  as  he 
sat  and  observed.  17.  And  a  word  came  into  his 
heart  and  he  said  :  "  All  the  signs  of  the  stars,  and  the 
signs  of  the  moon  and  of  the  sun  are  all  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord.     Why  do  I  search  (them)  out  ? 

18.  If  He  desireth,  He  causeth  it  to  rain,  morning 

and  evening ; 
And  if  He  desireth,  He  withholdeth  it, 
And  all  things  are.  in  His  hand.'"' 

19.  And  he  prayed  that  night  and  said 

"  My  God,  6od  Most  High,  Thou  alone  art  my 
God, 
And  Thee  and  Thy  dominion  have  I  chosen. 

And  Thou  hast  created  all  things, 

And  all  things  that  are  are  the  work  of  Thy  hands. 

20.  Deliver  me  from  the  hands  of  evil  spirits  who  have 

sway  over  the  thoughts  of  men's  hearts, 
And  let  them  not  lead  me  astray  from  Thee,  my 

God. 
And  stablish  Thou  me  and  my  seed  for  ever 
That  we  go  not  astray  from  henceforth  and  for 

evermore." 

21.  And  he  said,  "  Shall  I  return  unto  Ur  of  the  Chal- 
dees  who  seek  my  face  that  I  may  return  to  them,  or 
am  I  to  remain  here  in  this  place?  The  right  path 
before  Thee  prosper  it  in  the  hands  of  Thy  servant 
that  he  may  fulfil  (it)  and  that  I  may  not  walk  in  the 
deceitfulness  of  my  heart,  O  my  God."  22.  And  he 
made  an  end  of  speaking  and  praying,  and  behold  the 
word  of  the  Lord  was  sent  to  him  through  me,  saying  : 
11  Get  thee  up  from  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kindred 
and  from  the  house  of  thy  father  unto  a  land  which 
I  shall  show  thee,  and  I  shall  make  thee  a  great  and 
numerous  nation. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xi.  31. 


chap,  xii]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  91 

23.  And  I  shall  bless  thee 

And  I  shall  make  thy  name  great, 

And  thou  wilt  be  blessed  in  the  earth, 

And  in  thee  will  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed, 

And  I  shall  bless  them  that  bless  thee, 
And  curse  them  that  curse  thee.1 

24.  And  I  shall  be  a  God  to  thee  and  thy  son,  and  to 
thy  son's  son,  and  to  all  thy  seed  :  fear  not,  from 
henceforth  and  unto  all  generations  of  the  earth  I 
am  thy  God."  25.  And  the  Lord  God  said  :  "  Open 
his  mouth  and  his  ears,  that  he  may  hear  and  speak 
with  his  mouth,  with  the  language  which  hath  been 
revealed  "  ; a  for  it  had  ceased  from  the  mouths  of  all 
the  children  of  men  from  the  day  of  the  overthrow 
(of  Babel).  26.  And  1 8  opened  his  mouth,  and  his 
ears  and  his  lips,  and  I  began  to  speak  with  him  in 
Hebrew  in  the  tongue  of  the  creation.     27.  And  he 

jtook  the  booksof  his  fathers,  and  these  were  written 
irHkebrew,  and  he  transcribed  them,  and  he  began 
from  henceforth  to  study  them,  and  I  mad<T"known 
to  him  that  which  he  could  not  (understand),  and  he 
studied  them  during  the  six  rainy  months.4  28.  And 
it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  year  of  the  sixth  week 
that  he  spoke  to  his  father,  and  informed  him  that 
he  would  leave  Haran  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan 
to  see  it  and  return  to  him.  29.  And  Terah  his 
father  said  unto  him  ;   "  Go  in  peace  : 

May  the  eternal  God  make  thy  path  straight, 

And  the  Lord  [(be)  with  thee,  and]  protect  thee 
from  all  evil, 

And  grant  unto  thee  grace,  mercy  and  favour 
before  those  who  see  thee, 

And  may  none  of  the  children  of  men  have  power 
over  thee  to  harm  thee ; 

Go  in  peace. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xii.  1-3  (cf.  Acts  vii.  3). 

*  t.  e.  the  sacred  language,  Hebrew,  knowledge  of  which 
had  been  lost  since  the  overthrow  of  Babel.  According  to 
another  tradition  Heber  alone  retained  knowledge  of  Hebrew 
because  he  had  taken  no  part  in  the  building  of  the  Tower. 

■  The  angel  is  the  speaker.  4  i.  e.  the  winter. 


92  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  xif 

30.  And  if  thou  seest  a  land  pleasant  to  thy  eyes  to 
dwell  in,  then  arise  and  take  me  to  thee  and  take  Lot 
with  thee,  the  son  of  Haran  thy  brother,  as  thine 
own  son  :  the  Lord  be  with  thee.  31.  And  Nahor 
thy  brother  leave  with  me  till  thou  returnest  in 
peace,  and  we  go  with  thee  all  together." 

Abram  with  Lot  in  Canaan  and  Egypt  (cf.  Gen. 
xii.  4-20).  Abram  separates  from  Lot  (cf. 
Gen.  xiii.  n-18)  (xiii.  1-21). 

XIII.  And  Abram  journeyed  from  Haran,  and  he 
took  Sarai,  his  wife,  and  Lot,  his  brother  Harass 
son ,  to  the  land  of  Canaan ,  and  he  came  into  tAsshurt.1 
and  proceeded  to  Shechem,  and  dwelt  near  a  lofty 
aaj^f  2.  And  he  saw,  and,  behold,  the  land  was  very 
'pleasant  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  to  the  lofty. 
oak.  3.  And  the  Lord  said  to  him  ;  "  To  "thee  and 
to  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land."  4.  And  he  built 
an  altar  there,  and  he  offered  thereon  a  burnt  sacrifice 
to  the  Lord,  who  had  appeared  to  him.  5.  Antf 
he  removed  from  thence  unto  the  mountain  .  .  .• 
Bethel  on  the  west  and  Ai  on  the  east,  and  pitched 
his  tent  there.4  6.  And  he  saw. and  behold,  the  land 
was  very  wide  and  good,  and  everything  grew  thereon 
— vines  and  figs  and  pomegranates,  oaks  and  ilexes, 
and  terebinths  and  oil  trees,  and  cedars  and  cypresses 
and  date  trees,  and  all  trees  of  the  field,  and  there 
was  water  on  the  mountains.  7.  And  he  blessed 
the  Lord  who  had  led  him  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees, 
and  had  brought  him  to  this  land.  8.  And  it  came 
1954  A.M.  to  pass  in  the  first  year,  in  the  seventh  week,  on.  the. 
nrw^mooh  of  the  first  month,  that  he  built  an  altar 
-on  this  mountain,  and  called  on  (he  name  of  the  Lord  ; 
"  Thou,  the  eternal  God,  art  my  God."  6  9.  And  he 
offered  on  the  altar  a  burnt  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 

1  Corrupt.     Read  probably  Canaan. 

»  For  1   cf.  Gen.   xii.   5-6.     For  "  lofty  oak  "  (so   LXX) 
MT  has  "  oak  oi  Moreh." 

•  Supply  t ?)  "  to  the  east  of  Bethel  with  "  (Charles). 
«   For  3-5Xcf.  Gen.  xii.  7.  8.  »  Cf.  Gen.  xii.  8. 


chap,  xin]     THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  93 

that  He  should  be  with  him  and  not  forsake  him  all 
the  days  of  his  life.     10.  And  he  removed  from  thence 
and  went  towards  the  south,1  and  he  came  to  Hebron, 
and  Hebron  was  built  at  that  time,  and  he  dwelt 
there  two  years,  and  he  went  (thence)  into  the  land  of 
the  south,  to  Bealoth,2  and  there  was  a  famine  in  the 
land.     11.  And  Abraui  went  into  Egypt  ■  in  the  third 
year  of  the  week,  and  he  dwelt  in  Egypt  five  years 
before  his  wife  was  torn  away  from  him.     12.  Now 
Tanais 4  in    Egypt   was   at    that   time   built — seven 
years  after  Hebron.5     13.  And  it  came  to  pass  when 
Pharaoh  seized  Sarai,  the  wife  of  Abram,  that  the 
Lord   plagued    Pharaoh    and    his   house   with   great 
plagues   because   of   Sarai,   Abram's  wife.     14.  And 
Abram  wab  very  gionous  by  reason  of  possessions 
in   sheep,   and   cattle,    and   asses,    and   horses,    and 
camels,  and  menservants,  and  maidservants,  and  in 
silver    and    gold    exceedingly.     And    Lot    also,    his 
brother's  son,  was  wealthy.     15.  And  Pharaoh  gave 
back  Sarai,  the  wife  of  Abram,  and  he  sent  him  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,6  and  he  journeyed  to  the  place 
where  he  had  pitched  his  tent  at  the  beginning,  to  the 
place  of  the  altar,  with  Ai  on  the  east,  and  Bethel  on 
the  west,  and  he  blessed  the  Lord  his  God  who  had 
brought  him  back  in  peace.7     16.  And  it  came  to 
pass  in  the  forty-first  jubilee,  in  the  third  year  of  the 
first  week,  that  he  returned  to  this  place  and  offered 
thereon  a  burnt  sacrifice,  and  called  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  said  :    "  Thou,  the  most  high  God,  art  my 
God  for  ever  and  ever."  8     17.  And  in  the  fourth  year 
01  this  week  Lot  parted  from  him,  and  Lot  dwelt  in 
Sodom,  and  the  men  of  Sodom  were  sinners  exceed- 
ingly.9    18.  And  it  grieved  him  in  his  heart  that  his 
brother's  son  had  parted  from  him ;    for  he  had  no 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xii.  9.  'A  town  in  S.  judah  (Josh.  xv.  24). 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xii.  10.  4  i.e.  Zoan.         •  Cf.  Num.  xiii.  22. 

•  For  13-150  cf.  Gen.  xii.  15-20  (note  that  Gen.  xii.  18  is 
omitted). 

7  Cf.  Gen.  xiii.  3-4.  8  Cf.  8  above. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xiii.  11,  13. 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xiii 

children,  io.1  In  that  year  when  Lot  was  taken 
captive,  the  Lord  said  unto  Abram,  after  that  Lot  had 
parted  from  him,  in  the  fourth  year  of  this  week  : 
'  Lift  up  thine  eyes  from  the  place  where  thou  art 
dwelling,  northward  and  southward,  and  westward 
and  eastward.  20.  For  all  the  land  which  thou 
seest  I  shall  give  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever,  and 
I  shall  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea :  *  though 
a  man  may  number  the  dust  of  the  earth,  yet  thy 
seed  shall  not  be  numbered.8  21.  Arise,  walk  (through 
the  land)  in  the  length  of  it  and  the  breadth  of  it,  and 
see  it  all;  for  to  thy  seed  shall  I  give  it."  And  Abram 
went  to  Hebron,  and  dwelt  there. 


The  Campaign  of  Chedorlaomer  (xiii.  22-29; 
cf.  Gen.  xhO. 

22.  AnbTTn  this  year  came  Chedorlaomer,  king  of 
Elam,  >and  Amraphel,  king  of  Shinar,  and  Arioch, 
king  of  S&l'asar,4  and  Tfirgal,*  king  of  nations,  and 
slew  the  king  of  Gomorrah,  and  the  king  of  Sodom 
fled,  and  many  fell  through  wounds  in  the  vale  of 
Siddim,  by  the  Salt  Sea.    23.  And  they  took  captive 
Sodom  and  Adam  •  and  Zeboim,  and  they  took  cap- 
tive Lot  also,  the  son  of  Abram's  brother,  and  all  his 
possessions,  and  they  went  to  Dan.7    24.  And  one 
who  had  escaped  came  and  told  Abram  that  his 
brother's  son  had  been  taken  captive  and  (Abram) 
armed 8  his  household  servants.     25.     .     .     .     .     . 

.    jor  Abram,  and  for  his  seed,  a 


For  10-21  cf.  Gen.  xiii.  14A-18. 

Cf.  Gen.  xxii.  17  (Gen.  xiii.  16  has  "  as  the  dust  of  the 
earth  "). 

"  So  that  if  a  man  can  number  .  .  .  then  shall  thy  seed 
also  be  numbered  "  (Gen.  xiii.  16). 

MT  Ellasar. 

MT  Tidal  (for  form  here  cf.  LXX  Gapydk). 

i.  e.  Admah. 

Cf.  Gen.  xiv.  14. 

R.V.  "led  forth";  the  rendering  "armed"  has  the 
support  of  the  Targum  Onkelos. 


chap,  xiii]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  95 

tenth  of  the  first-fruits  to  the  Lord,1  and  the  Lord 
ordained  it  as  an  ordinance  for  ever  that  they  should 
give  it  to  the  priests  who  served  before  Him,  that 
they  should  possess  it  for  ever.1  26.  And  to  this 
law  there  is  no  limit  of  days ;  for  He  hath  ordained 
it  for  the  generations  for  ever  that  they  should  give 
to  the  Lord  the  tenth  of  everything,  of  the  seed  and 
of  the  wine  and  of  the  oil  and  of  the  cattle  and  of  the 
sheep.  27.  And  He  gave  (it)  unto  His  priests  to 
eat  and  to  drink  with  joy  before  Him.  28.  And  the 
king  of  Sodom  came  to  him  and  bowed  himself  before 
liim,  and  said  :  "  Our  Lord  Abram,  give  unto  us  the 
4  souls  which  thou  hast  rescued,  but  let  the  booty  be 
thine."  29.  And  Abram  said  unto  him  :  "  I  lift 
up  my  hands  to  the  Most  High  God,  that  from  a 
thread  to  a  shoe-latchet  I  shall  not  take  aught  that  is 
thine,  lest  thou  shouldst  say  I  have  made  Abram 
rich;  save  only  what  the  young  men  have  eaten, 
and  the  portion  of  the  men  who  went  with  me — 
Aner,  Eschol,  and  Mamre.  These  will  take  their 
portion." 8 

God's  Covenant  with  Abram  (xiv.  1-20 ; 
cf.  Gen.  xv.). 

XIV.4  After  these  things/in  the  fourth  year  of  this 
week,  on  the  newmoon  of  the  third  month^  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  Abram  in  a  dream,  saying : 
"  Fear  not,  Abram ;  I  am  thy  defender,  and  thy 
reward  will  be  exceeding  great."  2.  And  he  said  : 
11  Lord,  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go 

1  Charles  suspects  a  lacuna  at  the  beginning  of  25.  It  no 
doubt  contained  an  account  of  the  pursuit  of  the  kings  and 
told  of  Melchizedek  (cf.  Gen.  xiv.  15-20).  That  Abraham 
should  have  given  tithes  to  Melchizedek  (who  was  uncircum- 
cised)  was  a  difficulty  to  later  Jews  (cf.  Justin,  Trypho  xix.). 
One  way  of  overcoming  it  was  to  identify  Melchizedek  with 
Shem. 

1  The  law  about  tithes  is  made  to  apply  for  the  Levitical 
/      priesthood;    cf.  xxxii.  15. 

'  For  28-29  cf.  Gen.  xiv.  21-24. 

4  For  1-6  cf.  Gen.  xv.  1-6. 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xiv 

hence  childless,  and  the  son  of  Mas^q,1  the  son  of 

my  handmaid,  is  the  Dammasek  Eliezer  :  he  will  be 

my  heir,  and  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed."     3.  And 

He  said  unto  him  :  "  This  (man)  will  not  be  thy  heir, 

but  one  that  will  come  out  of  thine  own  bowels ; 

he  will   be   thine  heir."     4.  And   He   brought   him 

forth  abroad,  and  said  unto  him  :   "  Look  toward 

heaven  and  number  the  stars,  if  thou  art  able  to 

number  them."     5.  And  he  looked  toward  heaven, 

and    beheld    the    stars.     And    He    said   unto   him  : 

"  So  shall  thy  seed  be."     6.  And  he  believed  in  the 

Lord,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness. 

7.  And  He  said  unto  him  :    "I  am  the  Lord  that 

Drought  thee  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  give  thee 

the  land  of  the  Canaanites  to  possess  it  for  ever; 

and  I  shall  be  God  unto  thee  and  to  thy  seed  after 

thee."1    8.  And  he   said:     "Lord,   Lord,  whereby 

shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit  (it)  ?  "     9.  And  he 

said  unto  him  :  ."  Take  Me  an  heifer  of  three  years, 

and  a  goat  of  three  years,  and  a  sheep  of  three  years, 

and  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  pigeon."  8     10.  And  he  took 

all  these  in  the  middle  of  the  month ;   and  he  dwelt 

at  the  oak  of  Mamre,  which  is  near  Hebron.4    II.  And 

he  built  there  an  altar,  and  sacrificed  all  these ;   and 

he  poured  their  blood  upon  the  altar,  and  divided 

them  in  the  midst,  and  laid  them  over  against  each 

other;   but  the  birds  divided  he  not.     12.  And  birds 

came  down  upon  the  pieces,  and  Abram  drove  them 

away,  and  did  not  suffer  the  birds  to  touch  them.5 

13.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  sun  had  set,  that 

an  ecstasy  fell  upon  Abram,  and  lo  !  an  horror  of 

great  darkness  fell  upon  him,  and  it  was  said  unto 

Abram  :   "  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be  a 

stranger  in  a  land  (that  is)  not  theirs,  and  they  will 

bring    them    into    bondage,    and    afflict    them   foji*- 

1  Wrongly  taken  as  a  proper  narne  (cf.  R.V.).     So  LXX. 

*  Cf.  Gen.  xv.  7. 

•  For  &-9  cf.  Gen.  xv.  6-9. 
4  Cf.  Gen.  xiv.  13. 

1  For  11-12  cf.  Gen.  xv.  10-11. 


Chap.Xiv]   THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES       .      97 

hundred  years.  l_  14.  And  the  nation  also  to  whom 
they  will  be  in  bondage  shall  I  judge,  and  after  that 
they  will  come  forth  thence  with  much  substance. 
15.  And  thou  wilt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace,  and  be 
buried  in  a  good  old  age.  16.  But  in  the  fourth 
generation  *  they  will  return  hither ;  for  the  iniquity 
of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  s  17.  And  he  awoke 
from  his  sleep,  and  he  arose,  and  the  sun  had  set ; 
and  there  was  a  flame,  and  behold  1  a  furnace  was 
smoking,  and  a  flame  of  fire  passed  between  the  pieces. 

18.  And  on  that  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with 
Abram,  saying  :  "  To  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land, 
from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river,  the  river 
Euphrates,  the  Kenites,  the  Kenizzites,  the  Kad- 
monites,  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Rephaim,  the  Phakor- 
ites,4  and  the  Hivites,5  and  the  Amorites,  and  the 
Canaanites,  and  the  Girgashites,  and  the  Jebusites."  6 

19.  And  the  day  passed,  and  Abram  offered  the  pieces, 
and  the  birds,  and  their  fruit -offerings,  and  their  drink- 
offerings,  and  the  fire  devoured  them.  20.  And  on 
that  day  7  we  made  a  covenant  with  Abram,  according 
as  we  had  covenanted  with  Noah  in  this_month ; 8 
and  Abram  renewed  the  festival  and  ordinance  for 
himself  for  ever. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xv.  13,  but  Exod.  xii.  40  gives  the  number  430. 
Tradition  assumes  that  the  number  includes  the  sojourn  of 
the  Patriarchs  in  Canaan.  Our  text  reckons  the  period  from 
the  birth  of  Isaac  (when  Abraham  was  100  years  old).  St. 
Paul  (Gal.  iii.  16-17)  reckons  430  years  from  the  announce- 
ment. According  to  Targ.  Ps.-Jon.  on  Exod.  xii.  40  f.,  the 
odd  30  years  cover  the  period  between  the  announcement 
and  Isaac's  birth. 

•  A  generation  =  100  years.  Isaac  was  born  when  Abra- 
ham was  100  years  old  (Gen.  xxi.  5). 

•  For  13-16  cf.  Gen.  xv.  12-16. 

4  Absent  from  MT  (which  inserts  "  Hittite  "  before  "  Periz- 
tite  "). 

•  So  LXX  and  Sam.  here  (Gen.  xv.  20) ;  but  MT,  Syr.  and 
Vulg.  omit. 

•  For  17-18  cf.  Gen.  xv.  17-21. 
'  t.  e.  the  15th  of  Sivan. 

■  Probably,  according  to  our  author,  on  the  same  day  of 
the  month. 
G 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES   [chap,  Xiv 

The  Birth  of  Ishmael  (xiv.  21-24;    c^«  G^n- 
xvi.  1-4.  11). 

21.  And  Abram  rejoiced,  and  made  all  these  things 
known  to  Sarai  his  wife ;  and  he  believed  that  he 
would  have  seed,  but  she  did  not  bear.  22.  And 
Sarai  advised  her  husband  Abram,  and  said  unto  him  : 
"  Go  in  unto  Hagar,  my  Egyptian  maid  :  it  may 
be  that  I  shall  build  up  seed  unto  thee  by  her.  ' 
23.  And  Abram  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Sarai 
his  wife,  and  said  unto  her,  "Do  (so)."  And  Sarai 
took  Hagar,  her  maid,  the  Egyptian,  and  gave  her 
to  Abram,  her  husband,  to  be  his  wife.  24.  And 
he  went  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived  and  bare 
him  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Ishmael,  in  the 
r^65  a.m.  fifth  year  of  this  week ;  and  this  was  the  eighty-sixth 
year  in  the  life  of  Abram. 

The  Feast  of  First-fruits.  Circumcision  in- 
stituted. The  Promise  of  Isaac's  Birth. 
Circumcision  ordained  for  all  Israel  (xv. 
1-34;  cf.  Gen.  xvii.). 

XV.  And  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  ffourthf 1  week  of 
this  jubilee,  in  the  third  month,  in  the  middle  of 
the  month,8  Abram  celebrated  the  feast  of  the  first- 
fruitS*  ot  trie  grain  harvest.  2.  And  he  offered  new 
offerings  on  the  altar,  the  first-fruits  of  the  produce, 
unto  the  Lord,  an  heifer  and  a  goat  and  a  sheep  on 
the  altar  as  a  burnt  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord ;  their 
fruit-offerings  and  their  drink-offerings  he  offered 
upon  the  altar  with  frankincense.4  3.  And  the  Lord 
appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him  :  "  I  am  God 
Almighty ;  approve  thyself  before  Me  and  be  thou 
perfect.     4.  And  I  will  make  My  covenant  between 

1  Read  "  third."  ■  i.  e.  the  15th  of  Sivan. 

*  i.  e.  the  Feast  of  Weeks.  The  Pharisees  celebrated  this 
feast  not  on  Sivan  15th,  but  on  Sivan  6th.  See  further 
Introduction. 

4  Cf.  xiv.  9.  The  offerings  prescribed  for  this  festival  in 
Lev.  xxiii.  1&-20  are  different. 


chap,  xv]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  99 

Me  and  thee,  and  I  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly."  l 
5.'  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face,  and  God  talked  with 
him,  and  said  : 

6.  "  Behold  My  ordinance  is  with  thee, 

And  thou  wilt  be  the  father  of  many  nations. 

7.  Neither  will  thy  name  any  more  be  called  Abram, 
But  thy  name  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever, 

shall  be  Abraham. 
For  the  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee. 

8.  And  I  shall  make  thee  very  great, 
And  I  shall  make  thee  into  nations, 
And  kings  will  come  forth  from  thee. 

9.  And  I  shall  establish  My  covenant  between  Me  and 
thee,  and  thy  seed  after  thee,  throughout  their 
generations,  for  an  eternal  covenant,  so  that  I  may 
be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee.  10. 
(And  I  shall  give  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee)  8 
the  land  where  thou  hast  been  a  sojourner,  the  land 
of  Canaan,  that  thou  mayst  possess  it  for  ever,  and  I 
shall  be  their  God."  II.1  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Abraham  :  "  And  as  for  thee,  do  thou  keep  My 
Covenant,  thou  and  thy  seed  after  thee  ;  and  circum- 
cise ye  every  male  among  you,  and  circumcise  your 
foresKins,  and  it  will  be  a  token  of  an  eternal  covenant 
between  Me  and  you.  12.  And  the  child  on  the 
eighth  day  6  ye  will  circumcise,  every  male  throughout 
your  generations,  him  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or 
whom  ye  have  bought  with  money  from  any  stranger, 
whom  ye  have  acquired  who  is  not  of  thy  seed.  13. 
He  that  is  born  in  thy  house  will  surely  be  circum- 
cised, and  those  whom  thou  hast  bought  with  money 
will  be  circumcised,  and  My  covenant  will  be  in  your 

1  For  3-4  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  i  f. 

•  For  5-10  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  3-8. 

•  The  bracketed  words  (lost  through  homoioteleuton)  are 
restored  from  Gen.  xvii.  8. 

4  For  11-13  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  0-13. 

•  MT  has  "  and  the  child  of  eight  days"     Our  text  here 
may  be  a  deliberate  alteration. 


loo  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  xv 

flesh  for  an  eternal  ordinance.  14.1  And  the  uncir- 
cumcised  male  who  is  not  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of 
his  foreskin  on  the  eighth  day,*  that  soul  will  be  cut . 
off  from  his  people,  for  he  hath  broken  My  covenant." 
I5.a  And  God  said  unto  Abraham  :  "As  for  Sarai 
thy  wife,  her  name  will  no  more  be  called  Sarai,  but 
Sarah  will  be  her  name.  16.  And  I  shall  bless  her, 
and  give  thee  a  son  by  her,  and  I  shall  bless  him,4  and 
he  will  become  a  nation,  and  kings  of  nations  will 
proceed  from  him."  17.  And  Abraham  fell  on  his 
face,  and  rejoiced,  and  said  in  his  heart :  "  Shall  a 
son  be  born  to  him  that  is  a  hundred  years  old,  and 
shall  Sarah,  who  is  ninety  years  old,  bring  forth  ? " 
18.  And  Abraham  said  unto  God  :  "  O  that  Ishmael 
might  live  before  thee  I  "  19.  And  God  said  :  "  Yea, 
and  Sarah  also  will  bear  thee  a  son,  and  thou  wilt  call 
his  name  Isaac,  and  I  shall  establish  My  covenant 
with  him,  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  for  his  seed 
after  him.  20.  And  as  for  Ishmael  also  have  I  heard 
thee,  and  behold  I  shall  bless  him,  and  make  him  great, 
and  multiply  him  exceedingly,  and  he  will  Deget 
twelve  princes,  and  I  shall  make  him  a  great  nation. 
21.  But  My  covenant  shall  I  establish  with  Isaac, 
whom  Sarah  will  bear  to  thee,  in  these  days,  in  the 
next  year."  22.  And  He  left  off  speaking  with  him, 
and  God  went  up  from  Abraham.  23.*  And  Abraham 
did  according  as  God  had  said  unto  him,  and  he  took 
Ishmael  his  son,  and  all  that  were  born  in  his  house, 
and  whom  he  had  bought  with  his  money,  every  male 
in  his  house,  and  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  fore- 

1  For  14  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  14. 

*  The  words  on  the  eighth  day  are  absent  from  the  text  oi 
Gen.  xvii.  14,  in  MT,  Syr.  and  Vulg.,  but  are  attested  by  the 
LXX  and  Sam.  The  strict  rule  about  the  eighth  day  was 
later  relaxed  among  the  Jews,  but  is  still  practised  by  the 
Samaritans. 

•  For  15-22  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  15-22. 

*  So  LXX,  Sam.,  Syr.  and  Vulg.  of  Gen.  xvii.  22.  But 
MT  makes  the  text  refer  to  Sarah  ("  yea,  I  will  bless  her, 
[and  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations  :  kings  of  peoples  shall 
be  of  her]/'  R.V.). 

•  For  23-24  cf.  Gen.  xvii.  23-27. 


chap,  xv]  THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  101 

skin.  24.  And  on  the  selfsame  day1  was  Abraham 
circumcised,  and  all  the  men  of  his  house,  (and  those 
born  in  the  house),  and  all  those,  whom  he  had  bought 
with  money  from  the  children  of  the  stranger,  were 
circumcised  with,  him.  25.  This  law  is  for  all  the 
generations  for  ever,  and  there  is  no  circumcision 
of  the  days,1  and  no  omission  of  one  day  out  of  the 
eight  days;*  for  it  is  an  eternal  ordinance,  ordained 
and  written  on  the  heavenly  tables.  26.  And  every 
one  that  is  born,  the  flesh  of  whose  foreskin  is  not 
circumcised  on  *  the  eighth  day,  belongeth  not  to  the 
children  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  made  with 
Abraham,  but  to  the  children  of  destruction  ;  nor 
is  there,  moreover,  any  sign  on  him  that  he  is  the 
Lord's,  but  (he  is  destined)  to  be  destroyed  and  slain 
from  the  earth,  and  to  be  rooted  out  of  the  earth, 
for  he  hath  broken  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  our  God. 
27.  For  all  the  angels  of  the  presence  and  all  the 
angels  of  sanctification  5  have  been  so  created  6  from 
the  day  of  their  creation,  and  before  the  angels  of 
the  presence  and  the  angels  of  sanctification  He  hath 
sanctified  Israel,  that  they  should  be  with  Him  and 
with  His  holy  angels.  28.  And  do  thou  command 
the  children  of  Israel  and  let  them  observe  the  sign 
of  this  covenant  for  their  generations  as  an  eternal 
ordinance,  and  they  will  not  be  rooted  out  of  the  land. 
29.  For  the  command  is  ordained  for  a  covenant, 
that  they  should  observe  it  for  ever  among  all  the 
children  of  Israel.  30.  For  Ishmael  and  his  sons  and 
his  brothers  and  Esau,  the  Lord  did  not  cause  to 
approach  Him,  and  he  chose  them  not  because  they 
are  the  children  of  Abraham,  because  He  knew  them, 
but  He  chose  Israel  to  be  His  people.     31.  And  He 

1  i.  e.  the  15th  of  Sivan. 

1  i.  t.   ?  of  the  days  preceding  the  eighth  day. 

•  Only  on  the  eighth  day  is  the  rite  to  be  performed. 
4  Ethiop.  MSS.  and  Lat.  have  "  till." 

•  The  two  highest  orders  of  angels,  who  share  with  Israel 
the  privilege  of  observing  the  Sabbath  (cf.  ii.  18-21).  and  of 
being  circumcised. 

•  t.  «.  have  been  created  circumcised. 


102  THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xv 

sanctified  it,  and  gathered  it  from  amongst  all  the 
children  of  men  1 ;    for  there  are  many  nations  and 
many  peoples,  and  all  are  His,  and  over  all  hath  He 
placed  spirits  in  authority  to  lead  them  astray a  from 
Him.     32.  But  over  Israel  He  .did  not  appoint  any 
angel  or  spirit,  for  He  alone  is  their  ruler,  and  He 
will  preserve  them  and  require  them  at  the  hand 
of  His  angels  and  His  spirits,  and  at  the  hand  of  all 
His  powers  in  order  that  He  may  preserve  them  and 
bless   them,   and   that   they   may   be   His   and   He 
may  be  theirs  from  henceforth  tor   ever.     33.    And 
now   I    announce   unto   thee   that    the   children   of 
Israel   will   not    keep   true   to   this   ordinance,   and 
they   will   not   circumcise   their   sons   according   to 
all  this  law ;    for  in  the  flesh  of  their   circumcision 
they    will    omit    this    circumcision    of    their    sons, 
and  all  of  them,   sons   of   Beliar,3   will   leave   their 
sons   uncircumcised   as   they   were   born.4    34.  And 
there  will  be  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  against  the 
children  of  Israel,  because  they  have  forsaken  His 
covenant  and  turned  aside  from  His  word,  and  pro- 
voked and  blasphemed,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not 
observe  the  ordinance  of  this  law ;    for  they  have 
treated  their  members  like  the  Gentiles,  so  that  they 
may  be  removed  and  rooted  out  of  the  land.     And 
there  will  no  more  be  pardon  or  forgiveness  unto 
them  [so  that  there  should  be  forgiveness  and  pardon] 
for  all  the  sin  of  this  eternal  error. 

1  Israel  is  God's  portion;  cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  8-9  in  the  LXX 
form  of  which  "  angels  "  is  read  instead  of  "  children  of 
Israel";  cf.  also  Ecclus.  xvii.  17.  The  "seventy  nations 
of  the  earth  were  placed  under  the  dominion  of  seventy 
angels";  but  in  Dan.  x.  13,  20,  21,  xii.  1,  Michael  is 
referred  to  as  Israel's  angel-prince. 

■  This  describes  the  result,  not  the  original  purpose  of  their 
appointment. 

•  In  i.  20  (see  note).  Beliar  is  clearly  a  Satanic  being. 
This  meaning  may  possibly  be  present  in  the  use  of  the 
expression  here.  "  Sons  of  Belial  "  is  common  in  the  O.T. 
(ex!  e.  g.  1  Sam.  ii.  12). 

'  Apparently  such  apostasy  was  widely  spread  when  our 
author  wrote. 


f 


\ 


chap,  xvi]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  103 

Angelic  Visitation  of  Abraham  in  Hebron  ; 
Promise  of  Isaac's  Birth  repeated.  The 
Destruction  of  Sodom  and  'Lot's  Deliver- 
ance (xvi.  1-9;  cf.  Gen.  xviii. -xix.). 

XVI.  And  on  the  new  moon  of  \hef  fourth  mnnfh 
we  l  appeared  unto  Abraham,  at  the  oak  of  Mamre, 
and  we  talked  with  him,  and  we  announced  to  him 
that  a  son  would  be  given  to  him  by  Sarah  his  wife.2 
2.  And  Sarah  laughed,  for  she  heard  that  we  had 
spoken  these  words  with  Abraham,  and  we  admon- 
ished her,  and  she  became  afraid,  and  denied  that  she 
had  laughed  on  account  of  the  words.8  3.  And  we 
told  her  the  name  of  her  son,  as  his  name  is  ordained 
and  written  in  the  heavenly  tables  (i.e.)  Isaac.  4.  And 
(that)  when  we  returned  to  her  at  a  set  time,  she  would 
have  conceived  a  son.  5.  And  in  lhis_month  the 
Lord  executed  his  judgments  on  Sodom,  and  Go- 
morrah, and  Zeboim,4  and  all  the  region  of  the  Jordan, 
and  He  burned  them  with  fire  and  brimstone,  and 
destroyed  them  until  this  day,  even  as  [lo]  I  have 
declared  unto  thee  all  their  works,  that  they  are 
wicked  and  sinners  exceedingly,  and  that  they  defile 
themselves  and  commit  fornication  in  their  flesh, 
and  work  uncleanness  on  the  earth.6  6.  And,  in 
like  manner,  God  will  execute  judgment  on  the  places 
where  they  have  done  according  to  the  uncleanness 
of  the  Sodomites,  like  unto  the  judgment  of  Sodom. 

7.  But  Lot  we  saved  ;  for  God  remembered  Abraham, 
and  sent  him  out  from  the  midst  of  the  overthrow. 

8.  And  he  and  his  daughters  committed  sin  upon  the 
earth,  such  as  had  not  been  on  the  earth  since  the 
days  of  Adam  till  his  time  ;  for  the  man  lay  with 
his  daughters.8  9.  And,  behold,  it  was  commanded 
and  engraven  concerning  all  his  seed,  on  the  heavenly 
tables,  to  remove  them  and  root  them  out,  and  to 

1  t.  e.  the  angels. 

*  For  1  cf.  Gen.  xviii.  1,  10  (vers.  2-9  omitted). 

0  Cf.  Gen.  xviii.  10,  12,  15.  4  Cf.  Gen.  xiv.  2,  8. 

•  For  5  cf.  Gen.  xix.  24.        •  For  7-8  cf.  Gen.  xix.  29,  31  ff . 


104  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xvi 

execute  judgment  upon  them  like  the  judgment  of 
Sodom,  and  to  leave  no  seed  of  the  man  on  earth  on 
the  day  of  condemnation. 

Abraham  at  Beersheba.  Birth  and  Circum- 
cision of  Jsaac  (cf.  Gen.  xxi.  1-4).  Institu- 
tion or  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (xvi.  10-31). 

10.  And  jn  this  month  Abraham  moved  from 
Hebron,  and  departed  and  dwelt  between  Kadesh 
and  Shur  in  the  mountains  l  of  Gerar.  II.  And  in 
the  middle  of  the  fifth  mouth  lie  moved  from  thence, 
and  dwelt  at  the  Well  of  the  Oath.'  12. 8  And  in 
the  middle  of_the_sixth  monlh  the  Lord  visited  Sarah 
and  did  unto  her  as  He  had  spoken,  and  she  conceived. 
980  a.m.  13.  And<she  bare  a  son  in  the  third  month  and  in  the 
middle  of  the  month.4  at  the  time  ol  which  the  Lord 
had  spoken  to  Abraham,  on  the  festival  of  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  harvest,8  Isaac  was  born.  14.  And 
Abraham  circumcised  his  son  on  the  eighth  day  :  he 
was  the  first  that  was  circumcised  according  to  the 
covenant  which  is  ordained  for  ever.  15.  And  in 
the  sixth  year  of  the  f  fourth  f  6  week  we  came  to 
Abraham,  to  the  Well  of  the  Oath,  and  we  appeared 
unto  him  [as  we  had  told  Sarah  that  we  should  return 
to  her,  and  she  would  have  conceived  a  son.  16.  And 
we  returned  in  the  seventh  month,  and  found  Sarah 
with  child  before  us] 7  and  we  blessed  him,  and  we 
announced  to  him  all  the  things  which  had  been 
decreed  concerning  him,  that  he  should  not  die  till 
he  should  beget  six  sons  more,8  and  should  see  (them) 
before  he  died ;  but  (that)  in  Isaac  should  his  name 
and  seed  be  called  :  •  17.  And  (that)  all  the  seed  of 
his  sons  should  be  Gentiles,  and  be  reckoned  with  the 
Gentiles ;    but   from  the  sons  of   Isaac  one  should 

1  Or  "  territories."         •  i.  e.  Beersheba;    cf.  Gen.  xxi.  31. 

•  For  12-14  cf.  Gen.  xxi.  1-4.         *  i.  e.  the  isth  of  Sivan. 

•  i.  e.  Pentecost.       •  Read  '  third  '    as  in  xv.  T  ^Charres"). 
7  The  bracketed  words  are  an  incorrect  gloss,  according  to 

Charles,  and  should  be  omitted. 

1  Six  sons  by  Keturah  (Gen.  xxv.  2).       •  Cf.  Gen.  xxi.  12. 


•     « : 


chap,  xvi]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  1         105 

v  '  become  a  holy  seed,  and  should  not  be  reckoned  among 
?  "  the  Gentiles.*  18,  For  he  should  become  the  portion 
,  •  of  the  Most  High,1  and  all  his  seed  had  fallen  into  the 
possession  of  God,  that  it  should  be  unto  the  Lord  a 
people  for  (His)  possession  8  above  all  nations  and 
that  it  should  become  a  kingdom  and  priests  and  a 
holy  nation.4  19.  And  we  went  our  way,  and  we 
•  announced  to  Sarah  all  that  we  had  told  him,  and 
they  both  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy.  20.  And 
he  built  there  an  altar  to  the  Lord  who  had  delivered 
him,  and  who  was  making  him  rejoice  in  the  land 
—  of  his  sojourning,  and  he  celebrated  a  festival  of  joy 
in  this  month  seven  days,5  near  the  altar  which  he 
had  built  at  the  Well  of  the  Oath.  ax.  And  he  built 
booths  for  himself  and  for  his  servants  on  this  festival, 
and  he  was  the  first  to  celebrate  the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles on  the  earth.  22.  And  during  these  seven 
days  he  brought  each  day  to  the  altar  a  burnt- 
offering  to  the  Lord,  two  oxen,*  two  rams,  seven 
sheep/ one  he-goat,  for  a  sin-offering,  that  he  might 
atone  thereby  for  himself  and  for  his  seed.  23.  And, 
as  a  thank-offering,  seven  rams,  seven  kids,  seven 
sheep,  and  seven  he-goats,  and  their  fruit-offerings 
and  their  drink-offerings ; 8  and  he  burnt  all  the  fat 
thereof  on  the  altar,  a  chosen  offering  unto  the  Lord 
for  a  sweet  smelling  savour.  24.  And  morning  and 
evening  he  burnt  fragrant  substances,*  frankincense 

1  All  Abraham's  descendants,  except  Jacob  and  his  seed, 
were  to  be  reckoned  among  the  Gentiles. 

»  Cf.  xv.  31  f. 

■  Cf.  Deut.  vii.  6;    Exod.  xix.  5. 
i  *  Cf.  Exod.  xix.  6  (MT  has  "  a  kingdom  of  priests  ");    cf. 

Rev.  v.  10,  i.  6,  which  agree  with  our  text  substantially,  and 
this  may  be  the  original  sense.     See  Introduction,  p.  xxxii. 

•  In  20-31  we  have  an  account  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles 
which  is  marked  by  peculiar  features. 

•  According  to  Num.  xxix.  13-33  thirteen  bullocks  were 
sacrificed  the  first  day,  and  this  number  was  diminished  by 
one  each  day  following. 

7  In  Num.  xxix.  13  fourteen  he-lambs. 

•  Cf.  2  Chron.  xxix.  21. 

•  Cf.  Exod.  xxx.  34;    Ecclus.  xxiv.  15. 


io6  THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xvi 

and  galbanum,  and  stacte,  and  nard,  and  myrrh, 
and  spice,  and  costum ;  all  these  seven  he  offered, 
crushed,  mixed  together  in  equal  parts  (and)  pure. 

25.  And  he  celebrated  this  feast  during  seven  days, 
rejoicing  with  all  his  heart  and  with  all  his  soul,  he 
and  all  those  who  were  in  his  house;  and  there  was 
no  stranger  with  him,  nor  any  that  was  uncircumcised. 

26.  And  he  blessed  his  Creator  who  had  created  him 
in  his  generation,  for  He  had  created  him  according 
to  His  good  pleasure ;    for  He  knew  and  perceived 

^  —         that  from  him  Avould  arise  the  plant  of  righteousness  *  , 
0  for  the  eternal  generations,  and  irom  him  a  holy 

seed,  so  that  it  should  become  like  Him  who  had  made 
all  things.  '  27.  And  he  blessed  and  rejoiced,  and  he 
called  the  name  of  this  festival  the  festival  of  the 
Lord,  a  joy  acceptable  to  the  Most  High  God.  28. 
And  we  blessed  him  for  ever,  and  all  his  seed  after  him 
throughout  all  the  generations  of  the  earth,  because 
he  celebrated  this  festival  in  its  season,  according 
to  the  testimony  of  the  heavenly  tables.  29.  For 
this  reason  it  is  ordained  on  the  heavenly  tables 
concerning  Israel,  that  they  shall  celebrate  the  feast  of 
tabernacles  seven  days  with  joy,  in  the  seventh 
month,  acceptable  before  the  Lord — a  statute  for 
ever  throughout  their  generations  every  year.2  30. 
And  to  this  there  is  no  limit  of  days ;  for  it  is  ordained 
for  ever  regarding  Israel  that  they  should  celebrate 
it  and  dwell  in  booths,  and  set  wreaths  upon  their 
heads,3  and  take  leafy  boughs,  and  willows  from  the 
brook.4  31.  And  Abraham  took  branches  of  palm 
trees,  and  the  fruit  of  goodly  trees,  and  every  day 
going  round  the  altar  with  the  branches  seven  times  * 

1  Cf.  xxi.  24;    1  Enoch  x.  16,  xciii.  5,  10. 

*  Cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  41 . 

*  This  custom  in  connection  with  Tabernacles  seems  to 
be  unknown  to  tradition  ;  cf .,  however,  Wisdom  ii.  7  f. ; 
Josephus,  Ant.  xix.  9,  1.  Bridegrooms  wore  wreaths,  but  the 
custom  was  later  abolished.    See  further  Introduction,  p.  xx  f. 

4  Cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  40. 

*  According  to  later  Jewish  tradition  it  was  only  on  the 
seventh  day  that  the  worshippers  went  round  the  altar  seven 
times. 


chap,  xvi]  THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  107 

[a  day]  in  the  morning,  he  praised  and  gave  thanks  to 
his  God  for  all  things  in  joy. 

The  Expulsion  of  Hagar  and  Ishmael  (xvii.  1-14  ; 
cf.  Gen.  xxi.  8-21). 

XVII.  And  in  the  first  year  of  the  ffiftht  l  week  1982 
Isaac  was  weaned  in  this  jubilee,  and  Abraham  made 
a  great  banquet  in  the  third  month,  on  the  day  his 
son  Isaac  was  weaned. "*  2.  And  Ishmael,  the  son 
of  Hagar,  the  Egyptian,  was  before  the  face  of  Abra- 
ham, his  father,  in  his  place,  and  Abraham  rejoiced 
and  blessed  God  because  he  had  seen  his  sons  3  and 
had  not  died  childless.  3.  And  he  remembered 
the  words  which  He  had  spoken  to  him  on  the  day  on 
which  Lot  had  parted  from  him,  and  he  rejoiced  be- 
cause the  Lord  had  given  him  seed  upon  the  earth 
to  inherit  the  earth,  and  he  blessed  with  all  his  mouth 
the  Creator  of  all  things.4  4.  5And  Sarah  saw  Ish- 
mael playing  and  dancing,9  and  Abraham  rejoicing 
with  great  joy,  and  she  became  jealous  of  Ishmael 
and  said  to  Abraham,  "  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and 
her  son ;  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  will  not  be 
heir  with  my  son,  Isaac."  5.  And  the  thing  was 
grievous  in  Abraham's  sight,  because  of  his  maid- 
servant and  because  of  his  son,  that  he  should  drive 
them  from  him.  6.  And  God  said  to  Abraham  "  Let 
it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  sight,  because  of  the  child 
and  because  of  the  bondwoman  ;  in  all  that  Sarah 
hath  said  unto  thee,  hearken  to  her  words  and  do 
(them) ;  for  in  Isaac  shall  thy  name  and  seed  be 
called.  7*  But  as  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  I 
will  make  him  a  great7  nation,  because  he  is  of  thy 
seed."     8.  And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 

1  Read  "  fourth  "  (Charles).  a  Cf.  Gen.  xxi.  8. 

3  Cf .  xvi.  16.  *  Cf.  xiii.  19  ff. 
•  For  4-13  cf.  Gen.  xxi.  9-21. 

6  Possibly  and  davcing  is  corrupt  for  with  Isaac,  which  is 
read  in  LXX  and  Vulg. ;    cf.  Gen.  xxi.  9. 

7  LXX,  Sam.,  Syr.  and  Vulg.  of  Gen  xxi.  13,  have  great  , 
but  MT  omits. 


108  THE    BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xvii 

and  took  bread  and  a  bottle  of  water,  and  placed 
them  on  the  shoulders  of  Hagar  and  the  child,  and 
sent  her  away.  9.  And  she  departed  and  wandered 
in  the  wilderness  of  Beersheba,  and  the  water  in  the 
bottle  was  spent,  and  the  child. thirsted,  and  was  not 
able  to  go  on,  and  fell  down.  10.  And  his  mother 
took  him  and  cast  him  under  an  olive  tree,1  and  went 
and  sat  her  down  over  against  him,  at  the  distance  of 
a  bow-shot ;  for  she  said,  "  Let  me  not  see  the  death 
of  my  child,"  and  as  she  sat  she  wept.  11.  And  an 
angel  of  God,  one  of  the  holy  ones,  said  unto  her, 
"  Why  weepest  thou,  Hagar?  Arise,  take  the  child, 
and  hold  him  in  thine  hand ;  for  God  hath  heard  thy 
voice,  and  hath  seen  the  child."  12.  And  she  * 
opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well  of  water,  and  she 
went  and  filled  her  bottle  with  water,  and  she  gave 
her  child  to  drink,  and  she  arose  and  went  towards 
the  wilderness  of  Paran.  13.  And  the  child  grew  and 
became  an  archer,  and  God  was  with  him ;  and  his 
mother  took  him  a  wife  from  among  the  daughters 
of  Egypt.  14.  And  she  bare  him  a  son,  and  he  called 
his  "name  Nebaioth ; 3  for  she  said,  "  The  Lord  was 
nigh  to  me  when  1  called  upon  him." 


Mastema    proposes    to    God     that    Abraham 
shall  be  put  to  the  Proof  (xvi.  15-18). 

2003  a.m.  15.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  week,  in  the 
first  year  thereof,  in  the  first  month  in  this  jubilee,4 
on  the  twelfth  of  this  month,  there  were  voices  in 
heaven  regarding  Abraham,  that  he  was  faithful  in 
all  that  He  told  him,  and  that  he  loved  the  Lord,  and 
that  in  every  affliction  he  was  faithful.     16.  And  the 

1  LXX  (Gen.  xxi.  15)  "under  a  fir  tree";  MT  "under 
one  of  the  shrubs." 

J  Read  (f)  "  He"  (God). 

a  Cf.  Gen.  xxv.  13. 

4  According  to  the  chronology  of  our  Book  (cf.  xvi.  12  with 
this  passage)  Isaac  was  twenty-three  years  old  when  he  was 
offered  up;   according  to  the  Seder  Olam  he  was  thirty -seven. 


chap,  xvn]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  109 

prince  Mastema  l  came  and  said  before  God,  "  Behold, 
Abraham  loveth  Isaac  his  son,  and  he  delighteth  in  him 
above  all  things  else ;   bid  him  offer  him  as  a  burnt- 
offering  dn  the  altar,  and  Thou  wilt  see  if  he  will  do 
this  command,  and  Thou  wilt  know  if  he  is  faithful 
in  everything  wherein  Thou  dost  try  him.     17.  And  .    < 
the  Lord  knew  that  Abraham  was  faithful  in  all  his   ." 
afflictions ;  for  He  had  tried  him  through  his  country    /  ^ 
and  with  famine,  and  had  tried  him  with  the  wealth  !  S'v 
of  kings,  and  had  tried  him  again  through  his  wife,! 
when  she  was  torn  (from  him),  and  with  circumcision,/ 
and  had  tried  him  through  Ishmael  and  Hagar,  his 
maid-servant,  when  he  sent  them  away.a     18.  And 
in  everything  wherein   He   had   tried  him,   he  was 
found  faithful,  and  his  soul  was  not  impatient,  and 
he  was  not  slow  to  act ;  for  he  was  faithful  and  a  lover 
of  the  Lord. 

The  Sacrifice  of  Isaac  :    Abraham  returns  to 
Beersheba  (x\iii.  1-19;  Cf.  Gen.  xxii.  1-19). 

XVIII.  And  God  said  to  him,  "  Abraham,  Abra- 
ham "  ;  and  he  said,  "Behold,  (here)  am  I."  2. 
And  He  said,  "  Take  thy  beloved8  son  whom  thou 
lovest,  (even)  Isaac,  and  go  unto  the  high  country,4 
and  offer  him  on  one  of  the  mountains  which  1  will 
point  out  unto  thee."  3.  And  he  rose  early  in  the 
morning  and  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  his  two  young 
men  with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son,  and  clave  the  wood 
of  the  burnt-offering,  and  he  went  to  the  place  on 

1  In  Gen.  xxii  1  it  is  God  Himself  who  directly  proves 
Abraham. 

■  Seven  of  the  traditional  ten  trials  of  Abraham  are  here 
mentioned:  (1)  Departure  from  his  country;  (2)  famine; 
(3)  the  wealth  of  kings;  (4)  seizure  of  his  wife;  (5)  circum- 
cision; (6)  and  (7)  expulsion  of  Hagar  and  Ishmael  f(8)  is 
the  unfruitfulness  of  Sarah;  (9)  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  and 
(10)  the  burial  of  Sarah,  cf.  xiv.  21  and  xix.  3,  81.  Slightly 
different  enumerations  occur  elsewhere  (e.g.  Pirke  de  R. 
Eliezer,  xxvi.-xxx.). 

1  So  LXX  (Gen.  xxii.  2)  :  MT  only  (son). 

*  So  LXX;    but  MT  "  the  land  of  Moriah." 


no         THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xviii 

the  tlii^d  day,  and  he  saw  the  place  afar  off.  4.  And 
he  came  to  a  well  of  water,  and  he  said  to  his  young 
men,  "  Abide  ye  here  with  the  ass,  and  I  and  the  lad 
shall  go  (yonder),  and  when  we  have  worshipped 
we  shall  come  again  to  you."  5.  And  he  took  the 
wood  of  the  burnt -offering  and  laid  it  on  Isaac  his 
son,  and  he  took  in  his  hand  the  fire  and  the  knife, 
and  they  went  both  of  them  together  to  that  place. 

6.  And  Isaac  said  to  his  father,  "  Father  " ;  and  he 
said,  "  Here  am  I,  my  son."  And  he  said  unto  him, 
"  Behold  the  fire,  and  the  knife,  and  the  wood ;  but 
where  is  the  sheep  for  the  burnt-offering,  father?  " 

7.  And  he  said,  "  God  will  provide  for  himself  a  sheep 
for  a  burnt-offering,  my  son."  And  he  drew  near 
to  the  place  of  the  mount  of  God.1  8.  And  he  built 
an  altar,  and  he  placed  the  wood  on  the  altar,  and 
bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  placed  him  on  the  wood 
which  was  upon  the  altar,  and  stretched  forth  his 
hand  to  take  the  knife  to  slay  Isaac  his  son.  9.  And 
I  stood  before  him,  and  before  the  prince  of  the 
Mast£ma,f  and  the  Lord  said,  "  Bid  him  not  to  lay 
his  hand  on  the  lad,  nor  to  do  anything  to  him,  for  I 
have  shown  that  he  feareth  the  Lord."  10.  And 
I  called  to  him  from  heaven,  and  said  unto  him  : 
"Abraham,  Abraham";  and  he  was  terrified  and 
said  :  "  Behold,  (here)  am  I."  II.  And  I  said  unto 
him  :  "  Lay  not  thy  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither  do 
thou  anything  to  him ;  for  now  I  have  shown  that 
thou  fearest  the  Lord,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy  son, 
thy  first-born  son,  from  me."  12.  And  the  prince  of 
the  Mast£ma  was  put  to  shame ;  and  Abraham 
lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  behold,  a  single 
ram  caught  *  ...  by  his  horns,  and  Abraham  went 
and  took  the  ram  and  offered  it  for  a  burnt-offering 
in   the  stead  of  his  son.     13.  And  Abraham  called 

1  Instead  of  the  words  of  the  mount  of  God,  MT  (Gen.  xxii.  9) 
reads,  which  God  hath  told  htm  of. 

"  Here  (cf.,  also,  xviii.  12,  xiviii.  9,  12,  15),  Mastfema  is 
the  name  given  to  the  whole  class  cf  evil  spirits,  or  Satans; 
elsewhere  of  the  prince  of  these  himself. 

•    ?  add  in  a  thicket. 


CttAP.  xviii]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         in 

that  place  "  The  Lord  hath  seen,"  so  that  it  is  said 
"  (in  the  mount)  the  Lord  hath  seen  "  : l  that  is 
Mount  Sion.  14.  And  the  Lord  called  Abraham  by 
his  name  a  second  time  from  heaven,  as  he  caused  us 
to  appear  to  speak  to  him  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

15.  And  He  said  :    "  By  Myself  have  I  sworn,  saith 

the  Lord, 
Because  thou  hast  done  this  thing, 
And  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thy  beloved  2 

son,  from  Me, 

That  in  blessing  I  shall  bless  thee, 

And  in  multiplying  I  shall  multiply  thy  seed 

As  the  stars  of  heaven, 

And  as  the  sand  which  is  on  the  seashore. 

And  thy  seed  will  inherit  the  cities  •  of  its  enemies, 

16.  And  in  thy  seed  will  all  nations  of  the  earth  be 

blessed ; 

Because  thou  hast  obeyed  My  voice, 

And  I  have  shown  to  all  that  thou  art  faithful 

unto  Me  in  all  that  I  have  said  unto  thee  : 
Go  in  peace."  4 

17.  And  Abraham  went  to  his  young  men,  and  they 
arose  and  went  together  to  Beersheba,  and  Abraham 
dwelt  by  the  Well  of  the  Oath.  18.  And  he  cele- 
brated this  festival  every  year,  seven  days  with  joy, 
and  he  called  it  the  festival  of  the  Lord  according  to 
the  seven  days  during  which  he  went  and  returned  in 
peace.  19.  And  accordingly  hath  it  been  ordained 
and  written  on  the  heavenly  tables  regarding  Israel 
and  its  seed  that  they  should  observe  this  festival 
seven  days  with  the  joy  of  festival. 

1  Syr.  and  Vulg.  render  (Gen.  xxii.  14)  "will  see,"  "seeth." 
MT  "  it  shall  be  seen  "  (provided). 
*  MT  "  thine  only  "  (Gen.  xxii.  16). 
1  So  Sam.,  version,  LXX  :   MT  "  gate  "  (Gen.  xxii.  17). 
4  Cf.  1  Sam.  i.  17. 


ii2  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xix 


The  Death  and  Burial  of  Sarah  (xix.  1-9; 
cf.  Gen.  xxiii.). 

XIX.  And  in  the  first  year  of  the  first  week  in  the 
v010A.11.  forty-second  jubilee,  Abraham  returned  and  dwelt 
opposite  Hebron,  that  is  Kirjath  Arba,  two  weeks  of 
years.  2.  And  in  the  first  year  of  the  f  third  | l 
week  of  this  jubilee  the  days  of  the  life  of  Sarah  were 
accomplished,  and  she  died  in  Hebron.  3.  And 
Abraham  went  to  mourn  over  her  and  bury  her,  and 
we  tried  him  [to  see]  if  his  spirit  were  patient  and  he 
were  not  indignant  in  the  words  of  his  mouth;  and 
he  was  found  patient  in  this,  and  was  not  disturbed.* 
4.  For  in  patience  of  spirit  he  conversed  with  the 
children  of  Heth,  to  the  intent  that  they  should  give 
him  a  place  in  which  to  bury  his  dead.  5.  And  the 
Lord  gave  him  grace  before  all  who  saw  him,  and  he 
besought  in  gentleness  the  sons  of  Heth,  and  they  gave 
him  the  land  of  the  double  cave  8  over  against  Mamre, 
that  is  Hebron,  for  four  hundred  pieces  of  silver. 
6.  And  they  besought  him,  saying,  "  We  shall  give 
it  to  thee  for  nothing  " ;  but  he  would  not  take  it 
from  their  hands  for  nothing,  for  he  gave  the  price 
of  the  place,  the  money  in  full,  and  he  bowed  down 
before  them  twice ;  and  after  this  he  buried  his  dead 
in  the  double  cave.  7.  And  all  the  days  of  the  life 
of  Sarah  were  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  years, 
that  is,  two  jubilees  and  four  weeks  and  one  year  : 
these  are  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah. 

8.  This  is  the  tenth*  trial  wherewith  Abraham  was 
tried,  and  he  was  found  faithful,  patient  in  spirit. 

9.  And  he  said  not  a  single  word  regarding  the  rumour 
in  the  land  how  that  God  had  said  that  He  would 
give  it  to  him  and  to  his  seed  after  him,  and  he  begged 
a  place  there  to  bury  his  dead ;  for  he  was  found  faith- 

1   Read  "  second  "  (Charles). 

*  This  is  the  tenth  trial  of  Abraham;    cf.  xvii.  17  note. 

•  i.  t.  the  cave  of  Machpelah  (LXX,  rb  awt\\cuovrb  lukovy). 


chap,  xix]  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  113 

ful,  and  was  recorded  on  the  heavenly  tables  as  the 
friend  of  God.1 


Marriage  o!  Isaac  and  second  Marriage  of 
Abraham  (cf.  Gen.  xxiv.  15,  xxv.  1-4) ;  the 
Birth  of  Esau  and  Jacob  (cf.  Gen.  xxv.  19  ff.) 
(xix.  10-14). 

10.  And  in  the  fourth  year  thereof  he  took  a  wife 
for  his  son  Isaac  and  her  name  was  Rebecca  [the 
daughter  of  Bethuel,  the  son  of  Nahor,  the  brother 
of  Abraham]  a  the  sister  of  Laban  and  daughter  of 
Bethuel ;  and  Bethuel  was  the  son  of  M61ca,  who  was 
the  wife  of  Nahor,  the  brother  of  Abraham.  11.  And 
Abraham  took  to  himself  a  third  wife,  and  her  name 
was  Keturah,  from  among  the  daughters  of  his  house- 
hold servants,  for  Hagar  had  died  before  Sarah.8  12. 
And  she  bare  him  six  sons,  Zimram,  and  Jokshan, 
and  Medan,  and  Midian,  and  Ishbak,  and  Shuah,  in 
the  two  weeks  of  years.  13.  And  in  the  sixth  week, 
in  the  second  year  thereof,  Rebecca  bare  to  Isaac 
two  sons,  Jacob  and  Esau,  and  Jacob  was  a  smooth 
and  upright  4  man,  and  Esau  was  fierce,  a  man  of 
the  field,  and  hairy,  and  Jacob  dwelt  in  tents.  14. 
And  the  youths  grew,  and  Jacob  learned  to  write ;  5 
but  Esau  did  not  learn,  for  he  was  a  man  of  the  field 
and  a  hunter,  and  he  learnt  war,  and  all  his  deeds 
were  fierce. 

1  A  traditional  title  of  Abraham.     It  goes  back  to  Isa.  xli. 
8;   cf.  Jas.  ii.  23,  T.B.  Men.  536. 
1  The  bracketed  words  a  dittograph. 

•  This  explains  why  Abraham  did  not  take  Hagar  back. 
The  later  tradition  (cf.  e.  g.  Pirke  de  R.  Eliexer  xxx.)  identifies 
Hagar  with  Keturah. 

4  Cf.  Gen.  xxv.  27  (where  "  plain  "  =  lit.  "  upright  "), 
and  Gen.  xxvii.  11  (combined  here). 

•  According  to  the  Targums  the  "  tents  "  were  academies. 
Jacob  is  represented  as  a  lifelong  student  of  the  Torah  (cf. 
Ber.  rabba  lxiii;    Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  xxxii.). 


H 


H4  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xix 


Abraham  loves  Jacob  and  blesses  him 
(xix.  15-31). 

15.  And  Abraham  loved  Jacob,  but  Isaac  loved 
Esau.  16.  And  Abraham  saw  the  deeds  of  Esau,  and 
he  knew  that  in  Jacob  l  should  his  name  and  seed  be 
called ;  and  he  called  Rebecca  and  gave  command- 
ment regarding  Jacob,  for  he  knew  that  she  (too) 
loved  Jacob  much  more  than  Esau.  17.  And  he  said 
unto  her  :  "  My  daughter,  watch  over  my  son  Jacob, 
For  he  shall  be  in  my  stead  on  the  earth, 
And  for  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of 

men, 
And  for  the  glory  of  the  whole  seed  of  Shem. 
18.  For  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  choose  him  to  be  a 
people  for  possession  unto  Himself,  above  all  peoples 
that  are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.1  19.  And  be- 
hold, Isaac  my  son  loveth  Esau  more  than  Jacob,  but 
I  see  that  thou  truly  lovest  Jacob. 

20.  Add  still  further  to  thy  kindness  to  him, 
And  let  thine  eyes  be  upon  him  in  love ; 

For  he  will  be  a  blessing  unto  us  on  the  earth  from 
henceforth  unto  all  generations  of  the  earth. 

21.  Let  thy  hands  be  strong 

And  let  thy  heart  rejoice  in  thy  son  Jacob ; 
For  I  have  loved  him  far  beyond  all  my  sons. 

He  will  be  blessed  for  ever, 

And  his  seed  will  fill  the  whole  earth. 

22.  If  a  man  can  number  the  sand  of  the  earth, 
His  seed  also  will  be  numbered.8 

23.  And  all  the  blessings  wherewith  the  Lord  hath 
blessed  me  and  my  seed  shall  belong  to  Jacob  and 
his  seed  alway.  24.  And  in  his  seed  shall  my  name 
be  blessed,  and  the  name  of  my  fathers,  Shem,  and 

1  Jacob  was  to  be  the  founder  of  the  chosen  nation;    cf. 
ii.  20. 

"  Cf.  Deut.  vii.  6. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xiii.  16  (cf.  also  xiii.  20  of  our  Book). 


chap,  xix]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  115 

Noah,  and  Enoch,  and  Mahalalel,  and  Enos,  and  Seth, 
and  Adam.1     25.  And  these  shall  serve 

To  lay  the  foundations  of  the  heaven, 

And  to  strengthen  the  earth, 

And  to  renew  all  the  luminaries  which  are  in  the 
firmament." 
26.  And  he  called  Jacob  before  the  eyes  of  Rebecca 
his  mother,  and  kissed  him,  and  blessed  him,  and 
said  :  27.  "  Jacob,  my  beloved  son,  whom  my  soul 
loveth,  may  God  bless  thee  from  above  the  firmament, 
and  may  He  give  thee  all  the  blessings  wherewith  He 
blessed  Adam,  and  Enoch,  and  Noah,  and  Shem ; 
and  all  the  things  of  which  He  told  me,  and  all  the 
things  which  He  promised  to  give  me,  may  He  cause  to 
cleave  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever,  according  to 
the  days  of  heaven  above  the  earth.2  28.  And  the 
spirits  of  Mastema  shall  not  rule  over  thee  or  over  thy 
seed  3  to  turn  thee  from  the  Lord,  who  is  thy  God 
from  henceforth  for  ever.  29.  And  may  the  Lord 
God  be  a  father  to  thee  and  thou  the  first-born  son, 
and  to  the  people  alway.     Go  in  peace,  my  son." 

30.  And  they  both  went  forth  together  from  Abraham. 

31.  And  Rebecca  loved  Jacob,  with  all  her  heart  and 
with  all  her  soul,  very  much  more  than  Esau;  but 
Isaac  loved  Esau  much  more  than  Jacob. 

Abraham's   Last  Words   to  his  Children   and 
Grandchildren  (xx.  1-11). 

XX.  And  in  the  forty-second  jubilee,  in  the  first 
year  of  the  jseventhj  4  week,  Abraham  called 
Ishmael,  and  his  twelve  sons,6  and  Isaac  and  his 
two  sons,  and  the  six  sons  of  Keturah,  and  their 
sons.  2.  And  he  commanded  them  that  they  should 
observe  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  that  they  should  work 
righteousness,  and  love  each  his  neighbour,  and  act 

1  Notice  that  Methuselah  is  omitted,  and  Adam  is  reckoned 
among  the  saints  (with  Noah  and  Enoch). 

*  Cf.  xxii.  13.  3  As  over  the  Geritiles. "'  '' 

4  Probably  coirupt  for  "  sixth  "  (Charles). 
'  Cf.  Gen.  xxv.  13-15. 


n6  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xx 

on  this  manner  amongst  all  men ;   that  they  should 
each  so  walk  with  regard  to  them  as  to  do  judgment 
and  righteousness  on  the  earth.     3.  That  they  should 
circumcise  their  sons,1  according  to  the   covenant 
which  He  had  made  with  them,  and  not  deviate  to 
the  right  hand  or  the  left  of  all  the  paths  which  the 
Lord  had  c6mmanded  us ;   and  that  we  should  keep 
ourselves  from  all  fornication  and  uncleanness,  [and 
renounce  from  amongst  us  all  fornication  and  un- 
cleanness].*   4.  And  if  any  woman  or  maid  commit 
fornication  amongst  you,  burn  her  with  fire,*  and 
let  them  not  commit  fornication  with  her  after  their 
eyes  and  their  heart ;   and  let  them  not  take  to  them- 
selves wives  from  the  daughters  of  Canaan ;   for  the 
seed  of  Canaan  will  be  rooted  out  of  the  land.    5.  And 
he  told  them  of  the  judgment  of  the  giants,  and  the 
judgment   of   the   Sodomites,  how   they  had   been 
judged  on  account  of  their  wickedness,  and  had  died 
on  account  of  their  fornication,  and  uncleanness,  and 
mutual  corruption  through  fornication.* 

6.  "  And  guard  yourselves  from  all  fornication  and 

uncleanness, 
And  from  all  pollution  of  sin, 
Lest  ye  make  our  name  a  curse, 
And  your  whole  life  a  hissing,6 
And  all  your  sons  be  destroyed  by  the  sword, 
And  ye  become  accursed  like  Sodom, 
And  all  your  remnant  as  the  sons  of  Gomorrah. 

7.  I    implore    you,    my    sons,   love    the    God   of 

heaven, 
And  cleave  ye  to  all  His  commandments. 

1  Circumcision,  according  to  our  author,  is  binding  upon 
Ishmael's  and  Keturah's  descendants  (cf.  Gen.  xvji.  9/.). 
Nqtice  the  omission  of  Esau's  descendants.  According 
to  Pirate  de  R.  Eliezer  xxix.,  Esau,  though  he  had  been 
circumcised,  "  despised  circumcision  "  (his  birthright). 

*  Bracketed  as  a  dittograph. 

*  According  to  the  Law  only  the  adulterous  priest's  daughter 
was  to  be  burned  with  fire;  others  were  to  be  stoned  (cf. 
Lev.  xxi.  9,  xx.  10). 

*  Cf.  vii.  21  (note).  *  Cf.  Isa.  lxv.  15;    Jer.  xxix.  18. 


chap,  xx]  THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  117 

And  walk  not  after  their  idols,  and  after  their 

uncleannesses, 
8.1  And  make  not  for  yourselves  molten  or  graven 

gods ; a 
For  they  are  vanity, 
And  there  is  no  spirit  in  them ; 
For  they  are  work  of  (men's)  hands, 
And  all  who  trust  in  them,  trust  in  nothing. 
Serve  them  not,  nor  worship  them,8 
9.  But  serve  ye  the  Most  High  God,  and  worship 

Him  continually : 
And  hope  for  His  countenance  always, 
And  work  uprightness  and  righteousness  before 

Him, 
That  He  may  have  pleasure  in  you  and  grant 

you  His  mercy, 
And  send  rain  4  upon  you  morning  and  evening, 
And  bless  all  your  works  which  ye  have  wrought 

upon  the  earth, 
And  bless  thy  bread  and  thy  water,5 
And  bless  the  fruit  of  thy  womb  and  the  fruit 

of  thy  land, 
And  the  herds  of  thy  cattle,  and  the  flocks  of 

thy  sheep.6 

10.  And  ye  will  be  for  a  blessing  7  on  the  earth, 
And  all  nations  of  the  earth  will  desire  you, 
And  bless  your  sons  in  my  name, 

That  they  may  be  blessed  as  I  am." 

11.  And  he  gave  to  Ishmael  and  to  his  sons,  and  to 
the  sons  of  Keturah,  gifts,  and  sent  them  away  from 
Isaac  his  son,  and  he  gave  everything  to  Isaac  his 
son.8 

1  For  8  cf.  xii.  5,  xxii.  18.  *  Cf.  Deut.  xxvii.  15. 

•  Cf.  Exod.  xx.  5.  •  Cf.  xii.  4,  18. 

■  Cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  25.  •  Cf.  Deut.  vii.  13. 

'  Cf.  Gen.  xii.  2.  •  Cf.^Gen.  xxv.  5-6. 


A.M. 


118  THE   HOOK    OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xx 

The  Dwelling-places  of  the  Ishmaelites  and  of 
the  Sons  of  Keturah  (xx.  12-13). 

12.  And  Ishmael  and  his  sons,  and  the  sons  of 
Keturah  and  their  sons,  went  together  and  dwelt 
from  Paran  to  the  entering  in  of  Babylon  in  all  the 
lancj  wjuch  is  towards  the  East  facing  the  desert. 
13.  Arid  these  mingled  with  each  other,  and  their 
name  was  called  Arabs,  and  Ishmaelites. 

Abraham's  Last  Words  to  Isaac  (xxi.  1-25). 

2057  XXI.  And  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  fseventhf  l 
( ?205o)  week  of  this  jubilee  Abraham  called  Isaac  his  son,2 
and  commanded  him,  saying  :  "  I  am  become  old, 
and  know  not  the  day  of  my  death,3  and  am  full  of 
my  days.4  2.  And  behold,  I  am  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  years  old,6  and  throughout  all  the  days 
of  my  life  I  have  remembered  the  Lord,  and  sought 
with  all  my  heart  to  do  His  will,  and  to  walk  up- 
rightly in  all  His  ways.  3.  My  soul  hath  hated  idols, 
(and  I  have  despised  those  that  served  them,  and  I 
have  given  my  heart  and  spirit)  8  that  I  might 
observe  to  do  the  will  of  Him  who  created  me. 
4.  For  He  is  the  living  God,  and  He  is  holy  and 
faithful,  and  He  is  righteous  beyond  all,  and  there 
is  with  Him  no  accepting  of  (men's)  persons  and  no 
accepting  of  gifts ;  7  for  God  is  righteous,  and  execut- 

1  Read  "  sixth  "  (Charles). 

■  The  rest  of  this  chapter  purports  to  give  Abraham's 
directions  to  Isaac  regarding  certain  kinds  of  sacrifice.  It 
has  a  remarkable  parallel  in  Test.  XI 1  Patriarchs,  Levi  ix., 
where  Isaac  instructs  Levi  in  the  law  of  the  priesthood,  of 
sacrifices,  etc.  The  latter  is  much  shorter  than  our  chapter, 
but  hardly  more  original.  The  two  books  may  have  used  a 
common  source. 

•  In  Gen.  xxvii.  2  these  words  are  uttered  by  Isaac. 
4  Cf.  Gen.  xxv.  8,  where  LXX,  Sam.,  Vulg.  read  "  full  of 

days,"  but  MT  omits  "  days." 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xxV.  7. 

•  The  bracketed  words  are  supplied  from  the  Latin. 
'  Cf.  Deut.  x.  17. 


chap,  xxi]  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  119 

eth  judgment  on  all  those  who  transgress  His  com- 
mandments and  despise  His  covenant.  5.  And  do 
thou,  my  son,  observe  His  commandments  and  His 
ordinances  and  His  judgments,  and  walk  not  after 
the  abominations  and  after  the  graven  images  and 
after  the  molten  images.  6.  And  eat  no  blood  at 
all  of  animals  or  cattle,  or  of  any  bird  which  flieth 
in  the  heaven.1  y.2  And  if  thou  dost  slay  a  victim 
as  an  acceptable  peace-offering,  slay  ye  it,  and  pour 
out  its  blood  upon  the  altar,  and  all  the  fat  of  the 
offering  offer  on  the  altar  with  fine  flour  (and  the 
meat-offering)  mingled  with  oil,3  with  its  drink- 
offering — offer  them  all  together  on  the  altar  of 
burnt-offering ;  it  is  a  sweet  savour  before  the  Lord.4 
8.  And  thou  wilt  offer  the  fat  of  the  sacrifice  of 
thank-offerings  on  the  fire  which  is  upon  the  altar, 
and  the  fat  which  is  on  the  belly,  and  all  the  fat 
on  the  inwards  and  the  two  kidneys,  and  all  the  fat 
that  is  upon  them,  and  upon  the  loins  and  liver  thou 
shalt  remove,  together  with  the  kidneys.5  9.  And 
offer  all  these  for  a  sweet  savour  acceptable  before 
the  Lord,  with  its  meat-offering  and  with  its  drink- 
offering,  for  a  sweet  savour,  the  bread  6  of  the  offer- 
ing unto  the  Lord,  10.  And  eat  its  meat  on  that  day 
and  on  the  second  day,  and  let  not  the  sun  on  the 
second  day  go  down  upon  it  till  it  is  eaten,  and  let 
nothing  be  left  over  for  the  third  day;  for  it  is  not 
acceptable  [for  it  is  not  approved]  7  and  let  it  no 
longer  be  eaten,  and  all  who  eat  thereof  will  bring 
sin  upon  themselves;  for  thus  I  have  found  it  written 
in  the  books  of  mv  forefathers,  and  in  the  words  of 
Enoch,  and  in  the  words  of  Noah.8     n.  And  on  all 

1  Cf.  vii.  28  (note). 

2  For  7-0  cf.  the  summary  in  Test.  XII  Patr.  Levi  ix.  7. 
1  Cf.  Lev.  ii.  4.  4   For  7  cf.  Lev.  iii.  7-10. 

h  Cf.  Lev.  iii.  9-10.  •  "  Or  food  ";  cf.  Lev.  iii.  11. 

7  Bracketed  words  a  dittograph. 

1  No  trace  of  such  halakic  rules  exists  in  the  Books  of 
Enoch  or  the  fragments  of  the  Noah  apocalypse  that  nre  ex- 
tant. The  statement  in  the  text  seems  to  be  drigihal  to  the 
author  of  Jubilees. 


120  THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap.xxi 

thy  oblations  thou  shalt  strew  salt,  and  let  not  the 
salt  of  the  covenant  be  lacking  in  all  thy  oblations 
before  the  Lord.1     12.  And  as  regards  the  wood  of  the 
sacrifices,  beware  lest  thou  bring  (other)  wood  for 
the    altar  in  addition  to  these  :*  cypress,    d&fran,3 
sagad,   pine,   fir,   cedar,  savin,   palm,  olive,  myrrh, 
laurels  and 'citron,  juniper,  and  balsam.     13.  And  of 
these  kinds  of  wood  lay  upon  the  altar  under  the 
sacrifice,  such  as  have  been  tested  as  to  their  appear- 
ance, and  do  not  lay   (thereon)  any  split  or  dark 
wood,  (but)  hard  ana  clean,  without  fault,  a  sound 
and  new  growth  ;   and  do  not  lay  (thereon)  old  wood, 
[for  its   fragrance  is   gone]   for  there  is  no  longer 
fragrance  in  it  as  before.4     14.  Besides  these  kinds 
of  wood  there  is  none  other  that  thou  shalt  place 
(on  the  altar),  for  the  fragrance  is  dispersed,  and  the 
smell  of  its  fragrance  goeth  not  up  to  heaven .     15.  Ob- 
serve this  commandment  and  do  it,  my  son,  that 
thou  mayst  be  upright  in  all  thy  deeds.     16.  And  at 
all  times  be  clean  in  thy  body,  and  wash  thyself 
with  water  before  thou  approachest  to  offer  on  the 
altar,  and  wash  thy  hands  and  thy  feet  before  thou 
drawest  near  to  the  altar;   and  when  thou  art  done 
sacrificing,   wash   again   thy  hands   and   thy   feet.6 
17.  And  let  no  blood  appear  upon  you  nor  upon 
your  clothes ;   be   qn   thy  guard,   my  son,   against 
blood,  be  on  thy  guard  exceedingly;   cover  it  with 
dust.6     18.  And  do  not  eat  any  blood,  for  it  is  the 
soul ;   eat   no   blood   whatever.7     19.  And   take   no 
gifts  for  the  blood  of  man,  lest  it  be  shed  with  im- 
punity, without  judgment ;   for  it  is  the' blood  that 

1  Cf.  Lev.  ii.  13;    Test.  Levi  ix.  14. 

1  In  Test.  Levi  ix.  12  "  twelve  "  evergreen  trees  are  men- 
tioned ;    here  fourteen,  and  this  number  is  probably  correct. 

•  Probably  a  kind  of  fir. 

4  This  may  be  the  old  halaka ;  the  Mishna  has  no  trace  oi 
it.  The  Mishna  (Tamid  ii.  3)  allows  all  kinds  of  wood  except 
that  of  the  olive  and  vine;    cf.,  also,  Sifra  on  Lev.  i.  8. 

■  Cf.  Exod.  xxx.  19-21 ;   cf.  Test.  Levi  ix.  11. 

•^Cf.  Lev.  xvii.  13. 

7  Cf.  Lev.  xvii.  14;  Deut.  xii.  23. 


chap,  xxi]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  121 

is  shed  that  causeth  the  earth  to  sin,  and  the  earth 
cannot  'be  cleansed  from  the  blood  of  man  save  by 
the  blood  of  him  who  shed  it.1    20.  And  take  no 

E resent  or  gift  for  the  blood'  of  man  :  blood  for 
lood,  that  thou  mayest  be  accepted  before  the 
Lord,  the  Most  High  God;  for  He  is  the  defence  of 
the  good  :  and  that  thou  mayest  be  preserved  from 
all  evil,  and  that  He  may  save  thee  from  every  kind 
of  death. 

21.  I  see,  my  son, 

That  all  the  works  of. the  children  of  men  are 

sin  and  wickedness, 
And   all   their   deeds    are   uncleanness    and    an 

abomination  and  a  pollution; 
And  there  is  no  righteousness  with  them. 

22.  Beware,  lest  thou  shouldest  walk  in  their  ways 
And  tread  in  their  paths, 

And  sin  a  sin  unto  death  2  before  the  Most  High 

God. 
Else  He  will  [hide  His  face  from  thee, 
And]  3  give  thee  back  into  the  hands  4  of  thy 

transgression, 
And  root  thee  out  of  the  land,  and  thy  seed 

likewise  from  under  heaven, 
And   thy  name   and .  thy  seed  will   perish  from 

the  whole  earth'. 

23.  Turn   away '  from  all  their  deeds  and   all   their 

uncleanness, 
And  observe  the  ordinance  of  the  Most  High  God, 
And  do  His  will  and' be  upright  in  all  things. 

24.  And  He  will  bless  thee  in  all  thy  deeds, 

And  will  raise  up  from  thee  the  plant  of  right- 
•  eousness  5  through  all  the  earth,   throughout 

all  generations  of  the  earth, 
And  my  name  and  thy  name  will  not  be  for- 
gotten under  heaven  for  ever. 

1  Cf.  vii.  33;    Num.  xxxv.  33.  *  Cf.  xxxiii.  18. 

s  Bracketed  by  Charles  as  an  interpolation. 
i.e.  into  the  power  of. 


•  Cf.  xvi.  26. 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxi 

25.  Go,  my  son,  in  peace. 

May  the  Most  High  God,  my  God  and  thy  God, 

strengthen  thee  to  do  His  will, 
And  may  He  bless  all  thy  seed  and  the  residue 

of  thy  seed  for  the  generations  for  ever,  with 

all  righteous  blessings, 
That  thou  mayest  be  a  blessing  on  all  the  earth."  x 

26.  And  he  went  out  from  him  rejoicing. 

Isaac,  Ishmael  and  Jacob  join  in  Festival  with 
Abraham  for  the  Last  Time.  Abraham's 
Prayer  (xxii.  1-9). 

XXII.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fhrstf  2  week 
in  the  fforty-fourthf  3  jubilee,  in  the  jsecondf  year, 
that  is,  the  year  in  which  Abraham  died,  that  Isaac 
and  Ishmael  came  from  the  Well  of  the  Oath  to 
celebrate  the  feast  of  weeks — that  is,  the  feast  of  the 
first-fruits  of  the  harvest — to  Abraham,  their  father, 
and  Abraham  rejoiced  because  his  two  sons  had 
come.  2.  For  Isaac  had  many  possessions  in  Beer- 
sheba,  and  Isaac  was  wont  to.  go  and  see  his  posses- 
sions and 'to  return  to  his  father.  3.  And  in  those 
days  Ishmael  came  to  see  his  father,  and  they  both 
came  together,  and  Isaac  offered  a  sacrifice  for  a 
burnt-offering,  and  presented  it  on  the  altar  of  his 
father  which  he  had  made  in  Hebron.  4.  And  he 
offered  a  thank-offering  and  made  a  feast  of  joy 
before  Ishmael,  his  brother  :  and  Rebecca  made  new 
cakes  from  the  new  grain,  and  gave  them  to  Jacob, 
her  son,  to  take  them  to  Abraham,  his  father,  from 
the  first-fruits  of  the  land,  that  he  might  eat  and 
bless  the  Creator  of  all  things  before  he  died.  5.  And 
Isaac,  too,  sent  by  the  hand  of  Jacob  to  Abraham 
a  best  thank-offering,  that  he  might  eat  and  drink. 
6.  And  he  ate  and  drank,  and  blessed  the  Most  High 
God, 

1  £f    XX.  10. 

1  Read  "  sixth  "  (Charles).  • 

»  Read  "  forty -second  "  (Charles). 


chap,  xxii]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  123 

Who  hath  created  heaven  and  earth, 
Who  hath  made  all  the  fat  things  of  the  earth, 
And  given  them  to  the  children  of  men 
That  they  might  eat  and  drink  and  bless  their 
Creator. 

L"  And  now  I  give  thanks  unto  Thee,  my  God, 
cause  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  see  this  day :  behold , 
I  am  one  hundred  three  score  and  fifteen  years,  an 
old  man  and  full  of  days,1  and  all  my  days  have 
been  unto  me  peace.  8.  The  sword  of  the  adver- 
sary ■  hath  not  overcome  me  in  all  that  Thou  hast 
given  me  and  my  children  all  the  days  of  my  life 
until  this  day.  9.  My  God,  may  Thy  mercy  and 
Thy  peace  be  upon  Thy  servant,  and  upon  the  seed 
of  his  sons,  that  they  may  be  to  Thee  a  chosen 
nation  and  an  inheritance  ■  from  amongst  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  from  henceforth  unto  all  the  days 
of  the  generations  of  the  earth,  unto  all  the  ages." 

Abraham's  Last  Words  to  and  Blessings  of 
Jacob  (xxii.  10-30). 

10.  And  he  called  Jacob  and  said :  "  My  son 
Jacob,  may  the  God  of  all  4  bless  thee  and  strengthen 
thee  to  do  righteousness,  and  His  will  before  Him, 
and  may  He  choose  thee  and  thy  seed  that  ye  may 
become  a  people  for  His  inheritance  according  to  His 
will  alway.  And  do  thou,  my  son,  Jacob,  draw  near 
and  kiss  me."  11.  And  he  drew  near  and  kissed 
him,  and  he  said  : 

"  Blessed  be  my  son  Jacob 

And  all  the  sons  of  God  Most  High,  unto  all  the 
ages  : 

May  God  give  unto  thee  a  seed  of  righteousness ; 

And  some  of  thy  sons  may  He  sanctify  in  the 
midst  of  the  whole  earth; 

May  nations  serve  thee, 

1  Cf.  xxi.  1.  ■  Cf.  Jer.  vi.  23. 

•  Israel  is  God's  inheritance ;    cf.  Deut.  iv.  20. 
4  i.  e.  of  the  universe;   this  idea  often  recurs  in  our  author. 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxii 

And  all  the  nations  bow  themselves  before  thy 
seed.1 

12.  Be  strong  in  the  presence  of  men, 

And  exercise  authority  over  all  the  seed  of  Seth.8 
Then  thy  ways  and  the  ways  of  thy  sons  will  be 

justified, 
So  that1  they  shall  become  a  holy  nation. 

13.  May  the  Most  High  God  give  thee  all  the  blessings 
Wherewith  he  hath  blessed  me 

And  wherewith  He  blessed  Noah  and  Adam ;  8 
May  they  rest  on  the  sacred  head  of  thy  seed 
from  generation  to  generation  for  ever. 

14.  And  may  He  cleanse  thee  from  all  unrighteous- 

ness and.  impurity, 

That  thou  mayest  be  forgiven  all  (thy)  trans- 
gressions ;  (and)  thy  sins  of  ignorance. 

And  may  He  strengthen  thee, 

And  bless  thee. 

And  mayest  thou  inherit  the  whole  earth, 

15.  And  may  He  renew  His  covenant  with  thee, 
That  thou  mayest  be  to  Him  a  nation  for  His 

inheritance  4  for  all  the  ages, 
And  that  He  may  be  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  a 
God  in  truth  and  righteousness  throughout  all 
the  days  of  the  earth. 

16.  And  do  thou,  my  son  Jacob,  remember  my  words, 
And  observe  the  commandments  of  Abraham,  thy 

father  : 
Separate  thyself  from  the  nations, 
And  eat  not  with  .them  :  5 
And  do  not  according  to  their  works, 
And  become  not  their  associate ; 
For  their  works  are  unclean, 

1  Verbally  from  Gen.  xxvii.  29  (Isaac's  blessing  of  Jacob). 

*  i.e.  all  mankind  (Charles).- 

*  Cf.  xix.  27. 
4  Cf.  xxii.  9. 

*  A  strict  observance  of  the  dietary  laws  would  make  this 
practically  impossible;  cf.  Dan.  i.  8;  Matt.  ix.  11.  The 
question  was  one  of  crucial  importance  in  the  early  Maccabean 
period;   cf.  e.  g.  1  Mace.  i.  62. 


chap,  xxn]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  125 

And  all  their  ways  are  a  pollution  and  an  abomi- 
nation and  uncleanness. 

17.  They  offer  their  sacrifices  to  the  dead  * 
And  they  worship  evil  spirits,* 

And  they  eat  over  the  graves,8 

And  all  their  works  are  vanity  and  nothingness. 

18.  They  have  no  heart  to  understand 

And  their  eyes  do  not  see  what  their  works  are, 
And  how  they  err  in  saying  to  a  piece  of  wood  : 

1  Thou  art  my  God,' 
And  to  a  stone  :  '  Thou  art  my  Lord  and  thou 

art  my  deliverer.'  4 
[And  they  have  no  heart.]    B 

19.  And  as  for  thee,  my  son  Jacob, 
May  the  Most  High  God  help  thee 
And  the  God  of  heaven  bless  thee 

And  remove  thee  from  their  uncleanness  and  from 
all  their  error. 

20.  Be  thou  ware,  my  son  Jacob,  of  taking  a  wife 

from  any  seed  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan ; 
For  all  his  seed  is  to  be  rooted  out  of  the  earth.6 

21.  For,  owing  to  the  transgression  of  Ham,7  Canaan 

erred,8 
And  all  his  seed  will  be  destroyed  from  off  the 

earth  and  all  the  residue  thereof, 
And  none  springing  from  him  will  be  saved  on 

the  day  of  judgment. 

22.  And  as  for  all  the  worshippers  of  idols  and  the 

profane 
9(b)  There  will  be  no  hope  for  them  in  the  land  of 
the  living; 

1  Cf.  Deut.  xxvi.  14;   Ecclus.  xxx.  18,  19,  etc. 
1  Cf.  1  Cor.  x.  20  (1  Enoch  xix.  1). 

•  i.e.  Partake  of  the  sacrifices  offered  to  the  dead;    cf. 
Deut.  xxvi.  14  (according  to  one  interpretation). 

•  Cf.  Jer.  ii.  27.  •  Bracketed  words  a  dittograph. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  1  ;    Test.  Ixvi  ix.  10. 
'  Cf.  vii.  8. 

•  Canaan  wrongfully  seized  Palestine;    cf.  x.  29-34. 

•  The  four  following  lines  have  been  transposed  by  Charles 
for  the  sake  of  parallelism. 


126  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxn 

(e)  And  there  will  be  no  remembrance  of  them  on 

the  earth; 
(c)  For  they  will  descend  into  Sheol, 
(a)  And  into  the  place  of  condemnation  will  they  go,1 
As  the  children  of  Sodom  were  taken  away  from 

the  earth 
So  will'  all  those  who  worship  idols  be  taken 
away. 

23.  Fear  not,  my  son  Jacob, 

And  be  not  dismayed,  0  son  of  Abraham  : 
May  the   Most   High   God  preserve   thee   from 

destruction, 
And  from  all  the  paths  of  error  may  He  deliver 

thee. 

24.  This  house  have  I  built  for  myself  that  I  might 
put  my  name  upon  it  in  the  earth  :  [it  is  given  to 
thee  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever],2  and  it  will  be  named 
the  house  of  Abraham;  it  is  given  to  thee  and  to 
thy  seed  for  ever ;  for  thou  wilt  build  my  house *  and 
establish  my  name  before  God  for  ever:  thy  seed 
and  thy  name  will  stand  throughout  all  generations 
of  the  earth;1 

25.  And  he  ceased  commanding  4  him  and  blessing 
him.  26.  And  the  two  lay  together  on  one  bed,  and 
Jacob  slept  in  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  his  father's 
father  and  he  kissed  him  seven  times,  and  his  affec- 
tion and  his  heart  rejoiced  over  him.  27. B  And  he 
blessed  him  with  all  his  heart  and  said  :  '  The  Most 
High  God,  the  God  of  all,  and  Creator  of  all,  who 
brought  me  forth  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  that  He 
might  give  me  this  land  to  inherit  •  it  for  ever,  and 
that  I  might  establish  a  holy  seed — blessed  be  the 
Most  High  for  ever."  28.  And  he  blessed  Jacob  and 
said  :  "  My  son,  over  whom  with  all  my  heart  and 
my  affection  I  rejoice,  may  Thy  grace  and  Thy  mercy 

1  Cf.  vii.  29.  *  Bracketed  words  a  dittograph. 

•  "  House  "  throughout  this  passage  =  "  family." 

•  t.  e.  giving  the  last  commands ;  cf .  Gen.  xlix.  33  and  often. 
'  Charles  suspects  27  may  be  an  interpolation. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xv.  7;   Neh.  ix.  7. 


chap,  xxn]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  127 

be  lift  up  x  upon  him  and  upon  his  seed  alway> 
29.  And  do  not  forsake  him,  nor  set  him  at  nought 
from  henceforth  unto  the  days  of  eternity,  and  may 
Thine  eyes  be  opened  upon  him  and  upon  his  seed,* 
that  Thou  mayest  preserve  him,  and  bless  him,  and 
mayest  sanctify  him  as  a  nation  for  Thine  inherit- 
ance ;  30.  And  bless  him  with  all  Thy  blessings  from 
henceforth  unto  all  the  days  of  eternity,  and  renew 
Thy  covenant  and  Thy  grace  with  him  and  with  his 
seed  according  to  all  Thy  good  pleasure  unto  all  the 
generations  01  the  earth." 

The  Death  and  Burial  of  Abraham  (xxiii.  1-8; 
cf.  Gen.  xxv.  7-10). 

XXIII.  And  he  placed  two  fingers  of  Jacob  on 
his  eyes,8  and  he  blessed  the  God  of  gods,  and  he 
covered  his  face  and  stretched  out  his  feet  4  and 
slept  the  sleep  of  eternity,5  and  was  gathered  to  his 
fathers.  2.  And  notwithstanding  all  this  Jacob  was 
lying  in  his  bosom,  and  knew  not  that  Abraham,  his 
father's  father,  was  dead.  3.  And  Jacob  awoke  from 
his  sleep,  and  behold  Abraham  was  cold  as  ice,  and 
he  said:  "Father,  father!";  but  there  was  none 
that  spake,  and  he  knew  that  he  was  dead.  4.  And 
he  arose  from  his  bosom  and  ran  and  told  Rebecca, 
his  mother ;  and  Rebecca  went  to  Isaac  in  the  night 
and  told  him ;  and  they  went  together,  and  Jacob 
with  them,  and  a  lamp  was  in  his  hand,  and  when 
they  had  gone  in  they  found  Abraham  lying  dead. 
5.  And  Isaac  fell  on  the  face  of  his  father,  and  wept 
and  kissed  him/  6.  And  the  voices  were  heard  in 
the  house  of  Abraham,  and  Ishmael  his  son  arose, 
and  went   to   Abraham  his  father,   and  wept   over 

1  Cf.  Num.  vi.  26. 

1  Cf.  1  Kings  viii.  29,  52;    Dan.  ix.  18. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  4.  The  closing  of  the  eyes  (by  the  eldest 
son)  should  strictly  only  be  done  after  death,  according  to 
Jewish  tradition. 

4  Cf.  Gen.  xlix.  33  (of  the  death  of  Jacob). 

s  Cf.  Jer.  li.  39,  57.  •  Cf.  Gen.  1.  1. 


128         THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxiii 

Abraham  his  father,  he  and  all  the  house  of  Abraham, 
and  they  wept  with  a  great  weeping.  7.  And  his 
sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael  buried  him  in  the  double 
cave,1  near  Sarah  his  wife,  and  they  wept  for  him 
forty  days,  all  the  men  of  his  house,  and  Isaac  and 
Ishmael,  and  all  their  sons,  and  all  the  sons  of 
Ketu«ah  in'  their  places;  and  the  days  of  weeping 
for  Abraham  were  ended.  8.  And  he  lived  tnree 
jubilees  and  four  weeks  of  years,  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  years,  and  completed  the  days  of  his 
life,  being  old  and  full  of  days. 

The  decreasing  Years  and  increasing  Corrup- 
tion of  Mankind  (xxiii.  9-17). 

9.  For  the  days  of  the  forefathers,  of  their  life, 
were  nineteen  jubilees;  and  after  the  Flood  they 
began  to  grow  less  than  nineteen  jubilees,  and  to 
decrease  in  jubilees,  and  to  grow  old  quickly,  and 
to  be  full  of  their  days  by  reason  of  manifold  tribula- 
tion and  the  wickedness  of  their  ways,  with  the 
exception  of  Abraham.1  10.  For  Abraham  was  per- 
fect in  all  his  deeds  with  the  Lord,  and  well-pleasing 
in  righteousness  all  the  days  of  his  life ;  and  behold, 
he  did  not  complete  four  jubilees  in  his  life,  when 
he  had  grown  old  by  reason  of  the  wickedness,8  and 
was  full  of  his  days.  11.  And  all  the  generations 
which  will  arise  from  this  time  until  the  day  of  the 
great  judgment  will  grow  old  quickly,  before  they 
complete  two  jubilees,  and  their  knowledge  will 
forsake  them  by  reason  of  their  old  age  [and  all  their 
knowledge  will  vanish  away].4  12.  And-in  those 
days,  if  a  man  live  a  jubilee  and  a  half  of  years,  they 
will  say  regarding  him :  "He  hath  lived  long,  and 
the  greater  part  of  his  days  are  pain  and  sorrow  and 

1  i.  e.  Machpelah;   cf.  Gen.  xxv.  9. 

•  Man's  years  grow  less  as  mankind  grows  more  corrupt; 
cf.  for  a  similar  idea  4  Ezra  v.  50-55. 

•  Even    Abraham    grew    prematurely   old    owing   to    the 
universal  wickedness. 

4  Bracketed  words  a  ditto  graph. 


chap,  xxm]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         129 

tribulation,1  and  there  is  no  peace  :  13.  For  calamity 
followeth  on   calamity,  and  wound  on   wound,  and 
tribulation  on  tribulation,  and  evil  tidings  on  evil 
tidings,  and  illness  on  illness,  and  all  evil  judgments 
such  as  these,  one  with  another,  illness  and  over- 
throw, and  snow  and  frost  and  ice,  and  fever,  and 
chills,  and  torpor,  and  famine,  and  death,  and  sword, 
and  captivity,  and  all  kinds  of  calamities  and  pains."  * 
14.  And  all  these  will  come  on  an  evil  generation, 
which  transgresseth  on  the  earth  :  their  works  are 
uncleanness    and    fornication,    and    pollution    and 
abominations.8     15.  Then  they  will  say  :  "  The  days 
of  the  forefathers  were  many  (even),  unto  a  thousand 
years,  and  were  good ;   but,  behold,  the  days  of  our 
life,  if  a  man  hath  lived  many,  are  three  score  years 
and  ten,  and,  if  he  is  strong,  four  score  years,  and 
those  evil,4  and  there  is  no  peace  in  the  days  of  this 
evil  generation."     16.  And  in  that  generation  the 
sons  will  convict  their  fathers  and  their  elders  of  sin 
and  unrighteousness,5  and  of   the   words   of   their 
mouth  and  the  great  wickednesses  which  they  per- 
petrate, and  concerning  their  forsaking  the  covenant  • 
which  the  Lord  made  between  them  and  Him,  that 
they  should  observe  and  do  all  His  commandments 
and  His  ordinances  and  all  His  laws,  without  depart- 
ing either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.7     17.  For 
all  have  done  evil,8  and  every  mouth  speaketh  iniquity* 
and  all  their  works  are  an  uncleanness  and  an  abom- 
ination, and  all  their  ways  are  pollution,  uncleanness 
and  destruction. 

1  Cf.  Ps.  xc.  10. 

■   ?  a  picture  of  contemporary  misfortunes  (200  B.C.  and 
following  years). 

•  Cf.  vii.  21,  xx.  3<  xxii.  16. 

•  Cf.  Ps.  xc.  10. 

•  ?  the  protest  of  the  Hasidim  ("  the  pious  ")  against  the 
Hellenizers;   cf.  I  Mace.  ii.  42  IT. 

•  Cf.  1  Mace.  i.  15. 

7  Cf.  1  Mace.  ii.  21  f.  (Deut.  v.  31-32,  xxvin.,!^).,  *<. 

•  Cf.  1  Mace.  i.  52-53.  •  Cf.  1  Mace.  ii.  0. 


130         THE  BOOK  OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xxni 

The  Messianic  Woes  (xxiii.  18-25). 
[Eschatological    partly.] 

18.  Behold  the  earth  will  be  destroyed  on  account 
of  all  their  works,  and  there  will  be  no  seed  of  the 
vine,    and   no   oil;   for   their   works   are   altogether 
faith^ss,  (and  they  will  all  perish  together,  beasts 
and  cattle  arid  birds,  and  all  the  fish  of  the  sea,1 
on  account  01  the  children  of  men.     19.  And  they 
will  strive  one  with  another,  the  young  with  the  old, 
and  the  old  with  the  young,  the  poor  with  the  rich, 
and  the  lowly  with  the  great,  and  the  beggar  with 
the  prince,*  on  account  of  the  law  and  the  cove- 
nant;  8   for  they  have  forgotten  commandment,  and 
covenant,   and   feasts,   and   months,   and   Sabbaths, 
and  jubilees,  and  all  judgments.     20.  And  they  will 
stand  (with  bows  and)  swords  and  war  to  turn  them 
back  into  the  way ;  4  but  they  will  not  return  until 
much  blood  hath  been  shed  on  the  earth,  one  by 
another.5     21.  And  those  who  have  escaped  will  not 
return  from  their  wickedness  to  the  way  of  righte- 
ousness, but  they  will  all  exalt  themselves  to  deceit 
and  wealth,  that  they  may  each  take  all  that  is  his 
neighbour's,  and  thev  will  name  the  great  name,  but 
not  in  truth  and  not  in  righteousness,  and  they  will 
defile  the  holy  of  holies  with  their  uncleanness  and 
the  corruption  of  their  pollution.6    22.  And  a  great 
punishment  will  befall  the  deeds  of  this  generation 

1  Cf.  4  Ezra  v.  7  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  20). 

1  Internecine  strife  is  a  standing  feature  in  such  eschato- 
logical passages;  cf.  4  Ezra  vi.  24;  Matt.  xxiv.  10;  Ap. 
Bar.,  lxx.  3-4. 

•  Here  the  writer  passes  to  a  description  of  what  is 
happening  in  his  own  time. 

•  "  Way  "  here  =  the  true  path  of  religion;  cf.  Isa.  xxx. 
21 ;    Acts  ix.  2,  etc. 

1  The  conflicts  between  the  early  Maccabeans  (at  the 
head  of  the  national  party  in  Judah)  and  the  Helienizers 
seem  to  be  referred  to. 

•  Probably  the  machinations  of  the  Hellenizing  party 
under  the  High  Priest  Alcimus  are  referred  to;  cf.  1  Mace. 
ix.  54. 


Chap.  Xxm]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         131 

from  the  Lord,  and  He  will  give  them  over  to  the 
sword  and  to  judgment  and  to  captivity,  and  to  be 
plundered  and  devoured.  23.  And  He  will  wake  up 
against  them  the  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  who  have 
neither  mercy  nor  compassion  r  and  who  will  respect 
the  person  of  none,  neither  old  nor  young,  nor  any 
one)  for  they  are  more  wicked  and  strong  to  $0  evil 
than  all  the  children  of  men. 

And  they  will  use  violence  against  Israel  and 

transgression  against  Jacob,  ' 
And  much  blood  will  be  shed  upon  the  earth, 
And  there  will  be  none  to  gather  and  none  to 
bury.1. 

24.  In  those  days  they  will  cry  aloud, 

And  call  and  pray  that  they  may  be  saved  from 

the  hand  of  the  sinners,  the  Gentiles ;  ■ 
But  none  will  be  saved. 

25.  And  the  heads  of  the  children  will  be  white  with 

grey  hair,3 
And  a  child  of  three  weeks  will  appear  old  like  a 

man  of  one  hundred  years, 
And  their  stature  will  be  destroyed  by  tribulation 

and  oppression. 

Renewed  Study  of  the  Law  followed  by  a  Re- 
newal of  Mankind.  The  Messianic  King- 
dom and  the  Blessedness  of  the  Righteous 

(xxiii.  26-32 ;  cf.  Isa.  lxv.  17ft).  [Eschatological.] 

26.  And  in  those  days  the  children  will  begin  to 

study  the  laws, 
And  to  seek  the  commandments, 
And  to  return  to  the  path  of  righteousness. 

27.  And   the   days  will    begin    to   grow   many   and 

increase  amongst  those  children  of  men, 

1  The  sufferings  of  the  nation  up  to  (but  not  including) 
Simon's  High  Priesthood  (142-135  b.c.)  may  be  referred  to. 
For  the  last  line  cf.  Jer.  viii.  2.  ■  Cf.  Gal.  ii.  15. 

•  Cf.  Sibylline  Oracles,  ii.  155  ("children  With"  gre^  hair 
on  their  temples  born  ") — one  of  the  signs  of  the  coming  in 
of  the  Messianic  age. 


132         THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxm 

Till  their  days  draw  nigh  to  one  thousand  years,1 
And  to  a  greater  number  of  years  than  (before) 
was  the  number  of  the  days. 

28.  And  there  will  be  no  old  man 

Nor  one  who  is  not  satisfied  with  his  days, 
For  all  will  be  (as)  children  and  youths.1 

29.  And  all  their  days  they  will  complete  and  live 

in  peace  and  in  joy,8 
And   there   will   be   no   Satan 4  nor  any'  evil 

destroyer ; 
For  all  their  days  will  be  days  of  blessing  and 

healing,* 

30.  And  at  that  time  the  Lord  will  heal  His  servants, 
And  they  will  rise  up  8  and  see  7  great  peace, 
And  drive  out  their  adversaries. 

And  the  righteous  will  see  and  be  thankful, 
And  rejoice  with  joy  for  ever  and  ever, 
And  will  see  all  their  judgments  and  all  their 
curses  on  their  enemies. 

31.  And  their  bones  will  rest  in  the  earth, 
And  their  spirits  will  have  much  joy,8 

And  they  will  know  that  it  is  the  Lord  who 

executeth  judgment, 
And  showeth  mercy  to  hundreds  and  thousands 

and  to  all  that  love  Him.9 

32.  And  do  thou,  Moses,  write  down  these  words; 
for  thus  are  they  written,  and  they  record  (them)  on 
the  heavenly  tables  for  a  testimony  for  the  generations 

.  for  ever. 

1  The  span  of  life  originally  designed  for  mankind.     Adam 
fell  short  of  this  because  of  his  sin. 
1  Cf.  Isa.  lxv.  20.  •  Cf.  Isa.  bcv.  14. 

•  Cf.  Assumpt.  Moses  x.  1.  •  Cf.  i.  29. 

•  Probably  there  is  no  reference  here  to  a  resurrection. 
Apparently  the  Messianic  kingdom  depicted  is  a  temporary 
one.  The  eschatology  harmonizes  with  that  of  1  Enoch 
xci.-civ. 

1  i.  e.  enjoy. 

•  ».  t.  they  will  enjoy  a  blessed  immortality  (with  no 
bodily  resurrection) ;   cf.  1  Enoch  ciii.  3-4. 

•  Cf.  4  Ezra  vii.  131  fl, 


chap,  xxiv]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  133 

Isaac  at  the  Well  of  Vision  :    Esau  sells  his 
Birthright  (xxiv.  1-7;  cf.  Gen.  xxv.  11,  29-34). 

XXIV.  And  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of 
Abraham,  that  the  Lord  blessed  Isaac  his  son,  and 
he  arose  from  Hebron  and  went  and  dwelt  at  the 
Well  of  the  Vision  1  in  the  first  year  of  the  third 
week  of  this  jubilee,  seven  years.  2.  And  in  the 
first  year  of  the  fourth  week  a  famine  began  in  the 
land,  besides  the  first  famine,  which  had  been  in  the 
days  of  Abraham.2  3.  And  Jacob  sod  lentil  pottage, 
and  Esau  came  from  the  field  hungry.  And  he  said 
to  Jacob  his  brother:  "Give  me  of  this  red  pot- 
tage." •  And  Jacob  said  to  him  :  "  Sell  to  me  thy 
[primogeniture,  this]  birthright  and  I  will  give  thee 
bread,  and  also  some  of  this  lentil  pottage."  4.  And 
Esau  said  in  his  heart  :  "  I  shall  die ;  of  what  profit 
to  me  is  this  birthright  ?  "  And  he  said  to  Jacob : 
"  I  give  it  to  thee."  5.  And  Jacob  said  :  "  Swear 
to  me,  this  day,"  and  he  sware  unto  him.  6.  And 
Jacob  gave  his  brother  Esau  bread  and  pottage,  and 
he  ate  till  he  was  satisfied,  and  Esau  despised  his 
birthright ;  for  this  reason  was  Esau's  name  called 
Edom,*  on  account  of  the  red  pottage  which  Jacob 
gave  him  for  his  birthright.  7.  And  Jacob  became 
the  elder,  and  Esau  was  brought  down  from  his 
dignity. 

Isaac's   Sojourn  in  Gerar  and   Dealings  with 
Abimelech  (xxiv.  8-27;  cf.  Gen.  xxvi.). 

8.  And  the  famine  was  over  the  land,  and  Isaac 
departed  to  go  down  into  Egypt  in  the  second  year 
of  this  week,  and  went  to  the  king  of  the  Philistines 
to  Gerar,  unto  Abimelech.  o,.5  And  the  Lord 
appeared  unto  him  and  said  unto  him  :  "  Go  not 
down  into  Egypt ;  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  shall 
tell  thee  of,  and  sojourn  in  this  land,  and  I  shall  be 

1  i.e.  Beer-lahai-roi   ("the  well  of  the  Living;  (  One,   that 

scethme");    Gen.  xxv.  11.  ' 

*  Cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  1.  •  Cf.  Gen.  xxv.  30. 

*  Edom  =  "  red."  ■  For  9-12  cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  2-6. 


134         THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxiv 

with  thee  and  bless  thee.     10.  For  to  thee  and  to 
thy  seed  shall  I  give  all  this  land,  and  I  shall  estab- 
lish  My  oath  which   I   sware  unto   Abraham   thy 
father,  and  I  shall  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of 
heaven,  and  shall  give  unto  thy  seed  all  this  land. 
II.  And  in  thy  seed  will  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
be   blessed;   because  thy  father  obeyed  My  voice, 
and  kept  My  charge  and  My  commandments,  and' 
My  laws,   and  My  ordinances,   and  My  covenant ; 
and  now  obey  My  voice  and  dwell  in  this  land." 
2080-2 1 01  12.  And  he  dwelt  in  Gerar  three  weeks  of  years. 
AM*      13.  And   Abimelech   charged   concerning   him,   and 
concerning   all   that   was   his,   saying :  "  Any   man 
that  shall  touch  him  or  aught  that  is  his  shall  surely 
die." l     14.  And    Isaac    waxed    strong    among    the 
Philistines,  and  he  got  many  possessions,  oxen  and 
sheep  and  camels  and  asses  and  a  great  household. 
15.  And  he  sowed  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  and 
brought  in  a  hundred-fold,  and  Isaac  became  exceed- 
ingly great,  and  the  Philistines  envied  him.     16.  Now 
all  the  wells  which  the  servants  of  Abraham  had  dug 
during   the   life   of   Abraham,   the   Philistines   had 
stopped   them   after   the   death   of   Abraham,   and 
filled   them   with   earth.'    17.  And   Abimelech   said 
unto    Isa,ac :    "  Go    from   us,    for   thou    art    much 
mightier  than  we  " ;   and  Isaac  departed  thence  in 
2101  a.m.  the  first  year  of  the  seventh  week,  and  sojourned 
in  the  valleys  of  Gerar.     18.  And  they  digged  again 
the  wells  Oi  water  which  the  servants  of  Abraham, 
his  father,  had  digged,  and  which  the  Philistines  had 
closed  after  the  death  of  Abraham  his  father,  and 
he  called  their  names  as  Abraham  his  father  had 
named  them.     19.  And  the  servants  of  Isaac  dug  a 
well  in  the'  valley,  and  found  living  water,  and  the 
shepherds  of   Gerar  strove  with   the   shepherds  of 
Isaac,    saying :  "  The   water   is   ours " ;   and    Isaac 
called  the  name  of  the  well  "  Perversity,"  £  because 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  11.     Notice  that  no  reference  is  made  in 
our  text  to  Isaac's  deception  about  Rebecca. 
1  —  Eseft;  ci  Gen.  xxvi.  20. 


chap.xxjv]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         135 

they  had  been  perverse  with  us.     20.  And  they  due 
a  second  well,  and  they  strove  for  that  also,  and 
he  called  its  name  "  Enmity."  l    And  he  arose  from 
thence  and  they  digged  another  well,  and  for  that 
they  strove  not,  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  "  Room,"1 
and  Isaac  said  :  "  Now  the  Lord  hath  made  room 
for  us,  and  we  have  increase^  in  the  land."     21.  And 
he  went  up  from  thence  to  the  Well  of  the  Oath,3 
in  the  first  year  of  the  first  week  in  the  forty-fourth 
jubilee.     22.  And  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  that 
night,  on  the  new  moon  of  the  first  month,  and 
said  unto  him :  "I  am  the  God  of  Abraham  thy 
father;  fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee,  and  shall  bless 
thee  and  shall  surely  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  sand 
of  the  earth,  for  the  sake  of  Abraham  my  servant." 
23.  And  he  built  an  altar  there,  which  Abraham  his 
father  had  first  built,  and  he  called  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  and  he  offered  sacrifice  to  {he  God  of 
Abraham  his  father.     24.  Arid  they  digged  a  well 
and  they  found  living  water.     25.  And  the  servants 
of   Isaac  digged   another  well   and   did   not 4   find 
water,  and  they  went  and  told  Isaac  that  they  had 
not  found  water,  and  Isaac  said  :  "  I  have  sworn 
this  day  to  the  Philistines  and  this  thing  hath  been 
announced  to  us."     26.  And  he  called  the  name  of 
that  place  the  "  Well  of  the  Oath  " ;   for  there  he 
had  sworn  to  Abimelech  and  Ahuzzath  his  friend  and 
Phicol  the  prefect  of  his  host.5     27.  And  Isaac  knew 
that  day  that  under  constraint  he  had  sworn   to 
them  to  make  peace  with  them. 

1  tm  Sitnah;   cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  21. 

*  =**  Rehoboth;   cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  22. 
1  i.e.  Beersheba. 

4  In  Gen.,  xxvi.  32  the  MT  does  not  read  not;  but  LXX 
agrees  with  our  text  in  so  reading.  It  is  implied  here  that 
their  failure  to  find  water  was  due  to  the  covenant  made  with 
Abimelech. 

•  Cf,  Gen.  xxvi,  31,  33. 


136  THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxiv 

Isaac  curses  the  Philistines  (xxiv.  28-33). 

28.  And  Isaac  on  that  day  cursed  the  Philistines  * 
and  said  :  M  Cursed  be  the  Philistines  unto  the  day 
of  wrath  ancj  indignation  from  the  midst  of  all 
nations ;  -may  God  make  them  a  derision'  and  a 
curse„an4,  a*n  object  of  wrath  and  indignation  in  the 
hands  of  the  sinners  the  Gentiles  and  in  the  hands 
of  the  Kittim  ■  29.  And  whoever  escapeth  the  sword 
of  the  enemy  and  the  Kittim,  may  the  righteous 
nation  8  root  out  in  judgment  from  under  heaven ; 
for  they  will  be  the  enemies  and  foes  of  my  children 
throughout  their  generations  upon  the  earth. 
30.  And  no  remnant  will  be  left  to  them, 

Nor  one  that  will  be  saved  on  the  day  of  the 

wrath  of  judgment ; 
For  for  destruction  and  rooting  out  and  expul- 
sion from  the  earth  is  the  whole  seed  of  the 
Philistines  (reserved), 
And  there  will  no  longer  be  left  for  these  Caph- 
torim  4  a  name  or  a  seed  on  the  earth. 
3 1.5  For  though  he  ascend  unto  heaven, 
Thence  will  he  be  brought  down, 
And  though  he  make  himself  strong  on  earth, 
Thertce  will  he  be  dragged  forth, 
And  though  he  hide  himself  amongst  the  nations, 
Even  from  thence  will  he  be  rooted  out ; 
And  though  he  descend  into  Sheol, 
There  also  will  his  condemnation  be  great, 
And  there  also  he  will  have  no  peace. 
32.  And  if  he  go  into  captivity, 

By  the  hands  of  tnose  that  seek  his  life  will 
they  slay  him  on  the  way, 

1  The  text  reflects  the  bitter  feeling  towards  the  Philistines 
existing  among  the  Jews  in  Maccabean  times.  The  Philistine 
cities  were  either  destroyed  or  captured  by  the  Maccabees. 

'  i.  e.  the  Macedonians;   cf.  1  Mace.  i.  1,  viii.  5. 

•  i.  s.  Judah  under  the  Maccabees. 

4  The  Philistines  came  oritinally  from  Caphtor  according 
to  Amos  ix.  7  (Deut.  ii.  23;    Jer.  xlvii.  4). 

•  The  basis  of  31-32  seems  to  be  Amos  ix.  2-4. 


chap,  xxiv]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  137 

And  neither  name  nor  seed  will  be  left  to  him 
on  all  the  earth ; 

For  into  eternal  malediction  will  he  depart." 
33,  And  thus  is  it  written  and  engraved  concerning 
him  on  the  heavenly  tables,  to  do  unto  him  on  the 
day  of  judgment,  so  that  he  may  be  rooted  out  of 
the  earth. 


Rebecca   admonishes    Jacob   not   to   marry   a 
Canaan  it  ish  Woman.     Rebecca's   Blessing 

(xxv.  1-23;  cf.  Gen.  xxv  hi.  1-4).  * 

XXV.  And  in  the  second  year  of  this  week  in  this 
jubilee,  Rebecca  called  Jacob  her  son,  and  spake 
unto  him,  saying  :  "  My  son,  do  not  take  thee  a 
wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan,  as  Esau,  thy  brother, 
who  took  him  two  wives  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan,1 
and  they  have  embittered  my  soul  •  with  all  their 
unclean  deeds  :  for  all  their  deeds  are  fornication 
and  lust,  and  there  is  no  righteousness  with  them, 
for  (their  deeds)  are  evil.  2.  And  I,  my  son,  love 
thee  exceedingly,  and  my  heart  and  my  affection 
bless  thee  every  hour  of  the  day  and  watch  of  the 
night.  3.  And  now,  my  son,  hearken  to  my  voice, 
and  do  the  will  of  thy  mother,  and  do  not  take  thee 
a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  this  land,  but  only  of  the 
house  of  my  father,  and  of  my  father's  Kindred. 
Thou  wilt  take  thee  a  wife  of  the  house  of  my  father, 
and  the  Most  High  God  will  bless  thee,  and  thy 
children  will  be  a  righteous  generation  and  a  holy 
seed."  4.  And  then  spake  Jacob  to  Rebecca,  his 
mother,  and  said  unto  ner  :  "  Behold,  mother,  I  am 
nine  weeks  *  of  years  old,  and  I  neither  know  nor 
have  I  touched  any  woman,  nor  have  I  betrothed 
myself  to  any,  nor  even  think  of  taking  me  a  wife 
of  the  daughters  of  Canaan.     5.  For  I  remember, 

1  With  this  section  also  compare  xxvii.  of  our  Bot>k.  '' 

*  Cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  34. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  46,  xxvi.  35.  4  i.  e.  63. 


138  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xxv 

mother,  the  words  of  Abraham,  our  father,  for  he 
commanded  me  not  to  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters 
of  Canaan,  but  to  take  me  a  wife  from  the  seed  of 
my  father's  house  and  from  my  kindred.     6.  I  have 
heard    before    that    daughters  *  have    been    born    to 
Laban,  thy  brother,  and  I  have  set  my  heart  on  them 
to  take  a  wife  from  amongst  them,     7.  And  for  this 
reason  I  have  guarded  myself  in  my  spirit  against 
sinning  or  being  corrupted  in  all  my  ways  throughout 
all  the  days  of  my  life ;   for  with  regard  to  lust  and 
fornication,   Abraham,   my  father;  gave   me  many 
commands.1     8.  And,  despite  all  that  he  hath  com- 
manded me,  these  two  and  twenty  years  my  brother 
hath  striven  with  me,  and  spoken  frequently  to  me 
and  said  :  '  My  brother,  take  to  wife  a  sister  of  my 
two  wives' ;   but   I  refuse  to  do  as  he  hath  done. 
9.  I  swear'  before  thee,  mother,  that  all  the  days  of 
my  life  I  will  not  take  me  a  wife  from  the  daughters 
of  the  seed  of  Canaan,  and  I  will  not  act  wickedly 
as  my  brother  hath  done.     19.  Fear  not,  mother;  be 
assured  that  I  shall  do  thy  will  and  walk  in  upright- 
ness, and  not  corrupt  my  ways  for  ever."     II.  And 
thereupon   she   lifted  up  her  face   to  heaven   and 
extended  the  fingers  of  her  hands,  and  opened  her 
mouth  and  blessed  the  Most  High  God,  who  had 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  she  gave  Him 
thanks  and  praise.     12.  And  she  said  :  "  Blessed  be 
the  Lord  God,  and  may  His  holy  name  be  blessed 
for  ever  and  ever,  who  hath  given  me  Jacob  as  a  pure 
son  and  a  holy  seed ;   for  He  is  Thine,  and  Thine 
shall  his  seed  be  continually  and  throughout  all  the 
generations  for  evermore.     13.  Bless  him,  0  Lord, 
•and  place  in  my  mouth  the  blessing  of  righteousness, 
that  I  may  bless  him."     14.  And  at  that  hour,  when 
the  spirit  of  righteousness  2  descended  into  her  mouth, 
she  placed  both  her  hands  on  the  head  of  Jacob,  and 
said : 

1  Cf.  xx.  4,  xxxix.  6. 

1  Cf?  John  xiv.  17,  xv.  26,  xvi.  13  (rb  vvtvua  tiji  AxnffUr)  ;  a 
variant  reading  here  is  "  Holy  Spirit." 


chap,  xxv]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  139 

15.  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Lord  of  righteousness  and 

God  of  the  ages ; 

And  may  He  bless  thee  beyond  all  the  generations 
of  men. 

May  He  give  thee,  my  son,  the  path  of  righteous- 
ness, 

And  reveal  righteousness  to  thy  seed. 

16.  And  may  He  make  thy  sons  many  during  thy 

life, 
And  may  they  arise  according  to  the  number  of 

the  months  of  the  year. 
And  may  their  sons  become   many  and  great 

beyond  the  stars  of  heaven, 
And  their  numbers  be  more  than  the  sand  of 

the  sea. 

17.  And  may  He  give  them  this  goodly  land — as  He 

said  He  would  give  it  to  Abraham  and  to  his 
seed  after  him  alway  * — 
And  may  they  hold  it  as  a  possession  for  ever. 

18.  And  may  I  see  (born)  unto  thee,  my  son,  blessed 

children  during  my  life, 
And  a  blessed  and  holy  seed  may  all  thy  seed  be. 

19.  And  as  thou  hast  refreshed  thy  mother's  spirit 

during  tmyt  *  n^e» 
The  womb  of  her  that  bare  thee  blesseth  thee, 
[My  affection]  and  my  breasts  bless  thee 
And  my  mouth  and  my  tongue  praise  thee  greatly. 

20.  Increase  and  spread  over  the  earth, 

And  may  thy  seed  be  perfect  in  the  joy  of  heaven 

and  earth  for  ever ; 
And  may  thy  seed  rejoice, 
And  on  the  great  day  of  peace  may  it  have 

peace. 

21.  And  may  thy  name  and  thy  seed  endnre  to  all 

the  ages, 
And  may  the  Most  High  God  be  their  God, 
And  may  the  God  of  righteousness  dwell  with 

them, 

1  Cf.  Luke  i.  55. 

»  Read  "  thy  "  (Charles). 


140  THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap.xxv 

And  by  them  may  His  sanctuary  be  built  unto 
all  the  ages.1 

22.  Blessed  be  he  that  blesseth  thoc, 

And  all  flesh  that  curseth  thee  falsely  may  it  be 
cursed  "  * 

23.  And  sne  kissed  hiin,  and  said  to  him  : 

"  May  the  Lord  of  the  world  love  thee 
As  the  heart  of  thy  mother  and  her  affection' 
rejoice  in  thee  and  bless  thee." 
And  she  ceased  from  blessing. 

Jacob  obtains  the  Blessing  of  the  Firstborn 

(xxvi.  1-35 ;  cf.  Gen.  xxvii.). 

XXVI.  And  in  the  seventh  year  of  this  week 
Isaac  called  Esau,  his  elder  son,  and  said  unto  him  : 
"  I  am  old,  my  son,  and  behold  my  eyes  are  dim  in 
seeing,  and  I  know  not  the  day  of  my  death.  2.  And 
now  take  thy  hunting  weapons,  thy  quiver  and  thy 
bow,  and  go  out  to  the  field,  and  hunt  and  catch  me 
(venison),  my  son,  and  make  me  savoury  meat,  such 
as  my  soul  loveth,  and  bring  it  to  me  that  I  may 
eat,  and  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die. 

3.  But    Rebecca    heard    Isaac    speaking    to    Esau. 

4.  And  Esau  went  forth  early  to  the  field  to  hunt 
and  catch  and  bring  home  to  his  father.  5.  And 
Rebecca  called  JacpD,  her  .son,  and  said  unto  him  : 
11  Behold,  I  heard  Isaac,  thy  father,  speak  unto 
Esau,  thy  brother,  saying  :  '  Hunt  for  me,  and  make 
me  savoury  meat,  and  bring  (it)  to  me  that  I  may 
eat  and  bless  thee  before  the  Lord  before  I  die.' 
6.  And  now,  my  son,  obey  my  voice  in  that  which 
I  command  thee  :  Go  to  thy  flock  and  fetch  me  two 
good  kids  of  the  goats,  and  I  will  make  them  savoury 
meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  he  loveth,  and  thou 
shalt  bring  (it)  to  thy  father  that  he  may  eat  and 
bless  thee  before  the  Lord  before  he  die,  and  that 
thou  mayst  be  blessed."  7.  And  Jacob  said  to 
Rebecca  his  mother  :  "  Mother,  I  shall  not  withhold 

1  Cf.  i.  29.  ■  Cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  29. 


chap.xxvi]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         141 

amy  thing  which  my  father  would  eat,  and  which 
would  please  him  :   only  I  fear,  my  mother,  that  he 
will   recognise   my   voice   and   wish   to   touch   me. 
8.  And  thou  knowest  that  I  am  smooth,  and  Esau, 
my  brother,  is  hairy,  and  I  shall  appear  before  his 
eyes  as  an  evildoer,  and  shall  do  a  deed  which  he 
had  not  commanded  me,  and  he  will  be  wroth  with 
me,  and  I  shall  bring  upon  myself  a  curse,  and  not 
a  blessing."     9.  And  ReDecca,  his  mother,  said  unto 
him  : . "  Upon  me  be  thy  curse,  my  son,  only  obey 
my  voice. '     10.  And  Jacob  obeyed  the  voice  of 
Rebecca,  his  mother,  and  went  and  fetched  two 
good  and  fat  kids  of  the  goats,  and  brought  them 
to  his  mother,  and  his  mother  made  them  (savoury 
meat)  such  as  he  loved,    n.  And  Rebecca  took  the 
goodly  raiment  of  Esau,  her  elder  son,  which  was 
with  her  in  the  house,  and  she  clothed  Jacob,  her 
younger  son,  (with  them),  and  she  put  the  skins  of 
the  kids  upon  his  hands  and  on  the  exposed  parts 
of  his  neck.     12.  And  she  gave  the  meat  ana  the 
bread  which  she  had  prepared  into  the  hand  of  her 
son  Jacob.     13.  And  Jacob  went  in  to  his  father 
and  said :  "  I  am  thy  son  :  I  have  done  according 
as  thou  badest  me  :  arise  and  sit  and  eat  of  that 
which  I  have  caught,  father,  that  thy  soul  may 
bless  me."     14.  And  Isaac  said  to  his  son  :  "  How 
hast  thou  found  so  quickly,  my  son?"     15.  And 
Jacob  said :  "  Because  (the  Lord)  thy  God  caused 
me  to  find."     16.  And  Isaac  said  unto  him  :  "  Come 
near,  that  I  may  feel  thee,  my  son,  if  thou  art  my 
son  Esau  or  not."     17.  And  Jacob  went  near  to 
Isaac,  his  father,  and  he  felt  him  and  said  :  18.  "The 
voice  is  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  are  the  hands 
"of  Esau,"  and  he  discerned  him  not,  because  it  was 
a  dispensation  from  heaven  l  to  remove  his  power 
of  perception  and  Isaac  discerned  not,  for  his  hands 
were  hairy  as  (his  brother)  Esau's,  so  that  he  blessed 
him.   .19.  And  he  said  :  M  Art  thou  my  son, Esau?  " 
and  he  said  :  "  I  am  thy  son  "  :  and  he  said,  "  iBring 
1  Cf.  1  Kings  xii.  15. 


i42         THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap.  Xxvl 

near  to  me  that  I  may  eat  of  that  which  thou  hast 
caught,  my  son,  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee." 
20.  And  he  brought  near  to  him,  and  he  did  eat, 
and  he  brought  him  wine  and  he  drank.  21.  And 
Isaac,  his  father,  said  unto  him  :  "  Come  near  and 
kiss  me,  my  son."  And  he  came  near  and  kissed 
him.  -  22.  And  he  smelled  the  smell  of  his  raiment, 
and  he  blessed  him  and  said  :  "  Behold,  the  smell 
of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a  (full) l  field  which  the 
Lord  hath  blessed. 

23.  And  may  the  Lord  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven 
And  of  the  dew  ■  of  the  earth,  and  plenty  of  corn 

and  oil :  • 
Let  nations  serve  thee, 
And  peoples  bow  down  to  thee. 

24.  Be  lord  over  thy  brethren, 

And  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  down  to  thee ; 
And  may  all  the  blessings  wherewith  the  Lord 

hath  blessed  me  and   blessed  Abraham,  my 

father,4 
Be  imparted  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever  : 
Cursed  be  he  that  curseth  thee, 
And  blessed  be  he  that  blesseth  thee." 

25.  And  it  came  to  pass  as  soon  as  Isaac  had  made  an 
end  of  blessing  his  son  Jacob,  and  Jacob  had  gone 
forth  from  Isaac  his  father  |he  hid  himself  andf1 
Esau,  his  brother,  came  in  from  his  hunting.  26.  And 
he  also  made  savoury  meat,  and  brought  (it)  to  his 
father,  and  said  unto  his  father  :  "  Let  my  father 
arise,  and  eat  of  my  venison  that  thy  soul  may  bless 
me."  27.  And  Isaac,  his  father,  said  unto  him: 
11  Who  art  thpu  ?  "  And  he  said  unto  him  :  "  I  am 
thy  first  born,  thy  son  Esau  :  I  have  done  as  thou 
hast   commanded   me."     28.  And    Isaac   was   very 

1  So  Latin  here,  and  Sam.  LXX  and  Vulg.  in  Gen.  xxvii. 
27  :  MT  omits. 

•  Text  of  Gen.  xxvii.  28  has  "  fatness." 

•  Text  of  Genesis  has  "  wine." 
4  Cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  4. 

•  Charles  suspects  this  to  be  an  addition  to  the  text :  read 
"  that." 


Chap,  xxvi j    fH£  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES        143 


greatly  astonished,  and  said  :  "  Who  is  he  that  hath 
hunted  and  caught  and  brought  (it)  to  me,  and  I 
have  eaten  of  all  before  thou  earnest,  and  have 
blessed  him  :  (and)  he  shall  be  blessed,  and  all  his 
seed  for  ever."  29.  And  it  came  to  pass  when  Esau 
heard  the  words  of  his  father  Isaac  that  he  cried 
with  an  exceeding  rreat'and  bitter  cry,  and  said 
unto  his  father:  "Bless  me,  (even)  me  also,  father." 
30.  And  he  said  unto  him :  "  Thy  brother  came  with 
guile,  and  hath  taken  away  thy  blessing."  And 
he  said  :  "  Now  I  know  why  his  name  is  named 
Jacob  :  behold,  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two 
times :  he  took  away  my  birth-right,  and  now  he 
hath  taken  away  my  blessing."  31.  And  he  said  : 
"  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  for  me,  father?  " 
and  Isaac  answered  and  said  unto  Esau  : 

"  Behold,  I  have  made  him  thy  lord, 

Aad  all  his  brethren  have  I  given  to  him  for 
servants, 

And  with  plenty  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil  have  I 
strengthened  him  : 

And  what  now  shall  I  do  for  thee,  my  son  ?  " 
32.  And  Esau  said  to  Isaac,  his  father  : 

"  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  O  father  ? 

Bless  me,  (even)  me  also,  father  "  : 
And  Esau  lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept.     33.  And 
Isaac  answered  and  said  unto  him  : 

"  Behold,  far  from  the  dew  of  the  earth  shall  be 
thy  dwelling, 

And  far  from  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above. 
34.  And  by  thy  sword  wilt  thou  live, 

And  thou  wilt  serve  thy  brother. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  when  thou  becomest  great,1 

And  dost  shake  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck, 

Thou  wilt  sin  a  complete  sin  unto  death,* 

1  So  Sam.  of  Gen.  xxtii.  40:  MT  "when  Thou  shalt 
break  loose." 

1  This  line  is  a  complete  departure  from  the  original  text, 
which  has  :  "  thou  shalt  shake  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck." 
The  interpretation  here  given  in  the  text  has  no  support 
elsewhere. 


144  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xxvi 

And  thy  seed  will  be  rooted  out  from  under 
heaven." 
35.  And  Esau  kept  threatening  Jacob  because  of  the 
blessing  wherewith  his  father  blessed  him,  and  he 
said  in  his  heart  :  "  May  the  days  of  mourning  for 
my  father  now  come,  so  that  I  may  slay  my  brother 
Jacob." 

Rebecca  induces  Isaac  to  send  Jacob  to  Meso- 
potamia. Jacob's  Dream  and  View  at 
Bethel  (xxyii.  1-27;   cf.  Gen.  xxviii.). 

XXVII.  And  the  words  of  Esau,  her  elder  son,  were 
told  to %  Rebecca  in  a  dream,  and  Rebecca  sent  and 
called  Jacob  her  younger  son,  and  said  unto  him  : 
2.  "  Behold  Esau  thy  brother  will  take  vengeance  on 
thee  so  as  to  kill  thee.  3.  Now,  therefore,  my  son, 
obey  my  voice,  and  arise  and  flee  thou  to  Laban,  my 
brother,  to  Haran,  and  tarry  with  him  a  few  days 
until  thy  brother's  anger  turneth  away,  and  he  remove 
his  anger  from  thee,  and  forget  all  that  thou  hast 
done ;  then  I  will  send  and  fetch  thee  from  thence." 
4.  And  Jacob  said:  "  I  am  not  afraid;  if  he  wisheth 
to  kill  me,  I  will  kill  him."  5.  But  she  said  unto 
him  :  "  Let  me  not  be  bereft  of  both  my  sons  on  one 
day."  6.  And  Jacob  said  to  Rebecca  his  mother  : 
44  Behold,  thou  knowest  that  my  father  hath  become 
old,  and  doth  not  see  because  his  eyes  are  dull,  and 
if  I  leave  him  it  will  be  evil  in  his  eyes,  because  I 
leave  him  and  go  away  from  you,  and  my  father  will 
be  angry,  and  will  curse  me.  I  will  not  go ;  l  when 
he  sendeth  me,  then  only  will  I  go."  7.  And  Rebecca 
said  to  Jacob  :  "  I  will  go  in  and  speak  to  him,  and  he 
will  send  thee  away."  8.  And  Rebecca  went  in  and 
said  to  Isaac  :  "  I  loathe  my  life  because  of  the  two 
daughters  of  Heth,  whom  Esau  hath  taken  him  as 
wives;  and  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  from  among  the 
daughters  of  the  land  such  as  these,  for  what  purpose 

1  The  author  desires  to  relieve  Jacob  of  the  reproach  of 
leaving  his  father  in  his  old  age. 


chap,  xxvn]  THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES         145 

do  I  further  live ;    for  the  daughters  of  Canaan  are 

evil."1     9.  And  Isaac  called  Jacob  and  blessed  him, 

and  admonished  him  and  said  unto  him  :    10.   "  Do 

not  take  thee  a  wife  of  any  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan  ; 

arise  and  go  to  Mesopotamia,  to  the  house  of  Bethuel, 

thy  mother's  father,  and  take  thee  a  wife  from  thence 

of  the  daughters  of   Laban,   thy  mother's  brother. 

11.  And  God  Almighty  bless  thee  and  increase  and 

multiply  thee  that  thou  maycst  become  a  company 

of  nations,  and  give  thee  the  blessings  of  my  father 

Abraham,  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  that 

thou  mayest  inherit  the  land  of  thy  sojournings  and 

all  the  land  which  God  gave  to  Abraham  :    go,  my 

son,  in  peace."     12.  And  Isaac  sent  Jacob  away,  and 

he  went  to  Mesopotamia,  to  Laban  the  son  of  Bethuel 

the  Syrian,  the  brother  of  Rebecca,  Jacob's  mother. 

13.  And  it  came  to  pass  after  Jacob  had  arisen  to 

go  to  Mesopotamia  that  the  spirit  of   Rebecca  was 

grieved  after  her  son,  and  she  wept.     14.  And  Isaac 

said  to  Rebecca  :    "  My  sister,2  weep  not  on  account 

of  Jacob,  my  son  ;  for  lie  goeth  in  peace,  and  in  peace 

will  he  return.     15.  The  Most  High  God  will  preserve 

him  from  all  evil,  and  will  be  with  him;   for  He  will 

not  forsake  him  all  his  days;     16.  For  I  know  that 

his  ways  will  be  prospered  in  all  things  wherever  he 

goeth,  until  he  return  in  peace  to  us,  and  we  see  him 

in   peace.     17.  Fear  not  on   his  acount,   my  sister, 

for  he  is  on  the  upright  path  and  he  is  a  perfect  man  : 

and  he  is  faithful  and  will  not  perish.     Weep  not." 

18.  And  Isaac  comforted  Rebecca  on  account  of  her 

son  Jacob,  and  blessed  him.     19.  And  Jacob  went 

from  the  Well  of  the  Oath  to  go  to  Haran  on  t lie 

first   year  of   the   second   week   in    the   forty-fourth 

jubilee,  and  he  came  to  Luzon  the  mountains,  that  is, 

Bethel,  on  the  new  moon  of  the  first  month  of  this  2115A.M. 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  40. 

2  The  use  of  "  sister  "  as  a  term  of  endearment  (to  a  wife) 
maybe  illustrated  from  Tobit  v.  20,  vii.  16;  Canticles  iv.  9, 
etc.,  but  appears  to  be  unknown  to  Rabbinic  literature.  Its 
use  here  may  be  designed  to  justify  Isaac's  having  called 
Rebecca  his  sister  at  Abimclcch's  court. 

K 


146        THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxvn 

week,  and  he  came  to  the  place  at  even  and  turned 
trom  the  way  to  the  west  of  the  road  that  night : 
and  he  slept  there ;  for  the  sun  had  set.  20.  And 
he  took  one  of  the  stones  of  that  place  and  laid  it 
(at  his  head)  under  the  tree,1  and  he  was  journeying 
alone,  and  he  slept.  21.  And  he  dreamt  that  night, 
and  behold  a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth,  and  the  top 
of  it  reached  to  heaven,  and  behold,  the  angels  of  the 
Lord  ascended  and  descended  on  it  :  and  behold,  the 
Lord  stood  upon  it.  22.  And  He  spake  to  Jacob  and 
said  :  "I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  thy  father, 
and  the  God  of  Isaac ;  the  land  whereon  thou  art 
sleeping,  to  thee  shall  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  after 
thee.  23.  And  thy  seed  will  be  as  the  dust  of  the 
earth,  and  thou  wilt  increase  to  the  west  and  to  the 
east,  to  the  north  and  the  south,  and  in  thee  and  in 
thy  seed  will  all  the  families  of  the  nations  be  blessed. 

24.  And  behold,  I  shall  be  with  thee,  and  shall  keep 
thee  whithersoever  thou  goest,  and  I  shall  bring  thee 
again  into  this  land  in  peace;  for  I  shall  not  leave 
thee   until   I   do  everything  that   I   told  thee  of." 

25.  And  Jacob  awoke  from  his  sleep,  and  said, 
"  Truly  this  place  is  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  I 
knew  it  not."  And  he  was  afraid  and  said  :  "  Dread- 
ful is  this  place  which  is  none  other  than  the  house  of 
God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  26.  And 
Jacob  arose  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  the  stone 
which  he  had  put  under  his  head  and  set  it  up  as  a 
pillar  for  a  sign,  and  he  poured  oil  upon  the  top  of  it. 
And  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Bethel;  but 
the  name  of  the  place  was  Luz  at  the  first.  27.  And 
Jacob  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  saying  :  "  If  the 
Lord  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way 
that  I  go,  and  give  me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to 
put  on,  so  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in 
peace,  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  Cod,  and  this  stone 
which  I  have  set  up  as  a  pillar  for  a  sign  in  this  place, 
shall  be  the  Lord's  house,  and  of  all  that  thou  givest 
me,  I  shall  give  the  tenth  to  thee,  my  God." 

1    ?  wtych  marked  a  shrine. 


chap,  xxviii]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES       147 


Jacob's  Marriage  to  Leah  and  Rachel  ;  his 
Children  and  Riches  (xxviii.  1-30;  cf.  Gen. 
xxix.,  xxx.,  xxxi.  1-2). 

XXVIII.  And  he  went  on  his  journey,  and  came 
to  the  land  of-  the  east,  to  Laban,  the  brother  of 
Rebecca,  and  he  was  with  him,  and  served  him  for 
Rachel  his  daughter  one  week.1    2}  And  in  the  first 
year  of  the  third  week  he  said  unto  him  :    "  Give 
me  my  wife,  for  whom  I  have  served  thee  seven 
years;  "    and  Laban  said  unto  Jacob.    "  I  will  give 
thee  thy  wife."    3.    And  Laban  made  a  feast,  and 
took  Leah  his  elder  daughter,  and  gave  (her)  to  Jacob 
as  a  wife,  and  gave  her  Zilpah  his  handmaid  for  an 
handmaid ;  and  Jacob  did  not  know,  for  he  thought 
that  she  was  Rachel.     4.  And  he  went  in  unto  her, 
and  behold,  she  was  Leah;    and  Jacob  was  angry 
with  Laban,  and  said  unto  him  :    "  Why  hast  thou 
dealt  thus  with  me  ?     Did  not  I  serve  thee  for  Rachel 
and  not  for  Leah?     Why  hast  thou  wronged  me? 
Take  thy  daughter,  and  I  will  go ;  for  thou  hast  done 
evil  to  me."     5.  For  Jacob  loved  Rachel  more  than 
Leah ;  for  Leah's  eyes  were  weak,  but  her  form  was 
very  handsome ;   but  Rachel  had  beautiful  eyes  and 
a   beautiful   and   very   handsome   form.8       6.  And 
Laban  said  to  Jacob :    "It  is  not  so  done  in  our 
country,  to  give  the  younger  before  the  elder." 4 
And  it  is  not  right  to  do  this ;  for  thus  it  is  ordained 
and  written  in  the  heavenly  tables,*  that  no  one 
should  give  his  younger  daughter  before  the  elder — 
but  the  elder  one  giveth  first  and  after  her  the  younger 
—and  the  man  who  doeth  so,  they  set  down  guilt 
against  him  in  heaven,  and  none  is  righteous  that 
doeth  this  thing,  for  this  deed  is  evil  before  the  Lord. 

1  ♦.  #.  seven  years.     For  1  cf.  Gen.  xxix.  1,  20. 
■  For  2-4  cf.  Gen.  xxix.  21-25. 
•  Cf.  Gen  xxix.  1 7-1 8a. 
4  Cf.  Gen,  xxix.  26. 

1  The   comment   of  the   angels.     This   rule   seems   to   be 
unknown  to  tradition. 


148       THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  [chap,  xxvut 

7.  And  command  thou  the  children  of  Israel  that  they 
do  not  this  thing ;  let  them  neither  take  nor  give  the 
younger  before  they  have  given  the  elder,  for  it  is 
very  wicked.  8.1  And  Laban  said  to  Jacob  :  "  Let 
the  seven  days  of  the  feast  of  this  one  pass  by,  and 
I  shall  give  thee  Rachel,2  that  thou  mayest  serve  me 
another  seven  years,  that  thou  mayest  pasture  my 
sheep  as  thou  didst  in  the  former  week."  9.  And  on 
the  day  when  the  seven  days  of  the  feast  of  Leah 
had  passed,  Laban  gave  Rachel  to  Jacob,  that  he 
might  serve  him  another  seven  years,  and  he  gave  to 
Rachel  Bilhah,  the  sister  of  Zilpah,'  as  a  handmaid. 
10.  And  he  served  yet  other  seven  years  for  Rachel, 
for  Leah  had  been  given  to  him  for  nothing.  11.  And 
the  Lord  opened  the  womb  of  Leah,  and  she  con- 
ceived and  Dare  Jacob  a  son,  and  he  4  called  his  name 

2122  a.m.  Reuben,6  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  ninth  month, 
in  the  first  year  of  the  third  week.  12.  But  the 
womb  of  Rachel  was  closed,  for  the  Lord  saw  that 
Leah  was  hated  and  Rachel  loved.  13.  And  again 
Jacob  went  in  unto  Leah,  and  she  conceived,  and 
bare  Jacob  a  second  son,  and  he  called  his  name 

2124  a.m.  Simeon,  on  the  twenty-first  of  the  tenth  month,  and 
in  the  third  year  of  this  week.  14.  And  again  Jacob 
went  in  unto  Leah,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  him 
a  third  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Levi,  in  the  new 

2127  a.m.  moon  of  the  first  month  in  the  sixth  year  of  this  week. 

1  For  8-10  cf.  Gen.  xxix.  27-29. 

1  The  marriage  of  two  living  sisters  to  the  same  man  is 
expressly  forbidden  in  the  Mosaic  Law;  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  i3. 

■  According  to  Test.  Naphtali  i.  also,  Bilhah  and  Zilpah 
were  sisters.  In  later  Jewish  tradition  they  are  represented 
as  daughters  of  Laban;  cf.  e.  g.  Pirfye  de  R.  Eliezer,  xxxvi. 

4  Gen.  xxix.  32  has  "  she  called." 

6  The  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  appear  in  our  text  in  the  same 
order  as  in  Gen.  xxix.  32-34,  xxx.  1-24,  xxxv.  17-18,  viz. 
(1)  Reuben;  (2)  Simeon;  (3)  Levi;  (4)  Judah ;  (5)  Dan; 
(6)  Naphtali;  (7)  Gad;  (8)  Asher;  (9)  Issachar;  (10) 
Zebulon;  (11)  Joseph;  (12)  Benjamin.  A  different  order  is 
given  in  Gen.  xlix.  and  in  the  Test.  XII  Patriarchs.  The 
order  of  birth,  as  given  in  Jubilees,  is  complicated  by  textual 
difficulties ;   see  Charles  ad  loc. 


chap,  xxviii]  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES        149 

15.  And  again  Jacob  went  in  unto  her,  and  she 
conceived,  and  bare  him  a  fourth  son,  and  he  called 
his  name  Judah,  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  third  month, 
in  the  |first|  year  of  the  jfourthf  week.  16.  And 
on  account  of  all  this  Rachel  envied  Leah,  for  she  did 
not  bear,  and  she  said  to  Jacob  :  "  Give  me  children  "  ; 
and  Jacob  said  :  "  Have  I  withheld  from  thee  the 
fruits  of  thy  womb?  Have  I  forsaken  thee?  "  17. 
And  when  Rachel  saw  that  Leah  had  borne  four  sons 
to  Jacob,  Reuben  and  Simeon  and  Levi  and  Judah, 
she  said  unto  him  :  "  Go  in  unto  Bilhah  my  hand- 
maid, and  she  will  conceive,  and  bear  a  son  unto  me." 
18.  (And  she  gave  (him)  Bilhah  her  handmaid  to  wife.) 
And  he  went  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare 
him  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Dan,  on  the  ninth  of, 
the  sixth  month,  in  the  |sixth|  year  of  the  fthirdf 
week.  19.  And  Jacob  went  in  again  unto  Bilhah 
a  second  time,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob 
another  son,  and  Rachel  called  his  name  Naphtali, 
on  the  fifth. of  the  seventh  month,  in  the  second  year 
of  the  fourth  week.  20.  And  when  Leah  saw  that 
she  had  become  sterile  and  did  not  bear,  she  envied 
(Rachel)  and  she  also  gave  her  handmaid  Zilpah  to 
Jacob  to  wife,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and 
Leah  called  his  name  Gad,  on  the  twelfth  of  the  eighth 
month,  in  the  third  year  of  the  fourth  week.  21.  And 
he  went  in  again  unto  her,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare 
him  a  second  son,  and  Leah  called  his  name  Asher, 
on  the  second  of  the  eleventh  month,  in  the  ffifthf 
year  of  the  fourth  week.  22.  And  Jacob  went  in 
unto  Leah,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and 
she  called  his  name  Issachar,  on  the  fourth  of  the 
fifth  month,  in  the  |fourth|  year  of  the  fourth  week, 
and  she  gave  him  to  a  nurse.  23.  And  Jacob  went 
in  again  unto  her,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  two 
(children),  a  son  and  a  daughter,  and  she  called  the 
name  of  the  son  Zebulon,  and  the  name  of  the  daughter 
Dinah,  in  the  seventh  of  the  seventh  month,  in  the 
sixth  year  of  the  fourth  v»cek.  24.  And  the  Lord  was 
gracious  to  Rachel,  and  opened  her  womb,  and  she 


150        THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  [chap,  xxvm 

conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his  name 
Joseph,  on  the  new  moon  of  the  fourth  month,  in  the 
2134  A.M.  fsixthj  year  in  this  lourth  week.     ^5.  And  in  the 
days  when  Joseph  was  born,  Jacob  said  to  La  ban  : 
"  Give  me  my  wives  and  sons,  and  let  me  go  to 
my  father  Isaac,  and  let  me  make  me  an  house ;   for 
I  have  completed  the  years  in  which  I  have  served 
thee  for  thy  two  daughters,  and  I  will  go  to  the 
house  of  my  father."     26.  And  Laban  said  to  Jacob  : 
"  fTarry  with  me  for  thy  wagesj  \  and  pasture  my 
flock  for  me  again,  and  take  thy  wages.  '     27.  And 
they  agreed  with  one  another  that  he  should  give 
him  as  his  wages  those  of  the  lambs  and  kids  which 
were   born   black   and   spotted   and   white,2   (these) 
were  to  be  his  wages.     28.  And  all  the  sheep  brought 
forth    spotted   and    speckled    and    black,    variously 
marked,3  and  they  brought  forth  again  lambs  like 
themselves,  and  all  that  were  spotted  were  Jacob's 
and  those  which  were  not  were  Laban's.     29.  And 
Jacob's  possessions  multiplied  exceedingly,  and  he 
possessed  oxen  and  sheep4  and   asses  and  camels, 
and  menservants  and  maidservants.     30.  And  Laban 
and  his  sons  envied  Jacob,  and  Laban  took  back  his 
sheep   from   him,   and  he   observed   him   with  evil 
intent. 


Jacob's  Flight  with  his  Family  :   his  Covenant 
with  Laban  (xxix.  1-12;   cf.  Gen.  xxxi.). 

XXIX.  And  it  came  to  pass  when  Rachel  had 
borne  Joseph,  that  Laban  went  to  shear  his  sheep ; 
for  they  were  distant  from  him  a  three  days'  journey. 
2.  And  Jacob  saw  that  Laban  was  going  to  shear  his 

1  Gen.  xxx.  28  has  "  appoint  me  thy  wages." 
1  A  wrong  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  (Gen.  xxx.  32),  which 
means  "  speckled  "  (ndkod). 

*  Speckled  and  black,  variously  marked  =  LXX  woixfAa  kcl\ 
owototihr)  frwri.  :    MT  does  not  represent  <nro8oet8»?. 

*  And  sheep  :    so  LXX  (Gen.  xxx.  43);   but  MT  and  other 
versions  omit. 


chap,  xxix]  THE   BOOK  OF   JUBILEES  151 

sheep,  and  Jacob  called  Leah  and  Rachel,  and  spake 
kindly  unto  them  that  they  should  come  with  him 
to  the  land  of  Canaan.  3.  For  he  told  them  how  he 
had  seen  everything  in  a  dream,  even  all  that  He 
had  spoken  unto  him  that  he  should  return  to  his 
father  s  house ;  and  they  said  :  "To  every  place 
whither  thou  goest  we  will  go  with  thee."  4.  And 
Jacob  blessed  the  God  of  Isaac  his  father,  and  the 
God  of  Abraham  his  father's  father,  and  he  arose 
and  mounted  his  wives  and  his  children,  and  took  all 
his  possessions  and  crossed  the  river,  and  came  to  the 
land  of  Gilead,  and  Jacob  hid l  his  intention  from 
Laban  and  told  him  not.  5.  And  in  the  seventh 
year  of  the  fourth  week  Jacob  turned  (his  face) 
toward  Gilead  in  the  first  month,  on  the  twenty-first 
thereof.  And  Laban  pursued  after  him  and  overtook 
Jacob  in  the  mountain  of  Gilead  in  the  third  month, 
on  the  thirteenth  thereof.  6.  And  the  Lord  did  not 
suffer  him  to  injure  Jacob;  for  He  appeared  to  him 
in  a  dream  by  night.  And  Laban  spake  to  Jacob. 
7.  And  on  the  fifteenth  of  those  days  Jacob  made 
a  feast  for  Laban,  and  for  all  who  came  with  him, 
and  Jacob  sware  to  Laban  that  day,  and  Laban  also 
to  Jacob,  that  neither  should  cross  the  mountain  of 
Gilead  to  the  other  with  evil  purpose.  8.  And  he 
made  there  a  heap  for  a  witness  ;  wherefore  the  name 
of  that  place  is  called  :  "  The  Heap  of  Witness," 
after  this  heap.2  9.  But  before  they  used  to  call  the 
land  of  Gilead  the  land  of  the  Rephaim ; 3  for  it  was 
the  land  of  the  Rephaim,  and  the  Rephaim  were  born 
(there),  giants  whose  height  was  ten,  nine,  eight  down 
to  seven  cubits.  10. 4  And  their  habitation  was  from 
the  land  of  the  children  of  Amnion  to  Mount  Hermon, 
and  the  seats  of  their  kingdom  were  Knrnaim  and 

1  So  LXX   (Gen.  xxxi.  20)  and  Targ.  Onkelos;    but  MT 
Sam.,  Vulg.,  "  stole  "  (the  heart  of  Laban). 

2  Cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  47  ("  Galced  "  =  "  Heap  of  Witness  "). 

*  Cf.  Gen.  xiv.  5. 

*  The  places  here  mentioned  were,  perhaps,  associated  with 
Maccabean  victories  in  the  mind  of  our  author  (Charles). 


152         THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES    [chap,  xxix 

Ashtaroth,1  and  Edrei,  and  Misur,2  and  Beon.3 
ii.  And  the  Lord  destroyed  them  because  of  the  evil 
of  their  deeds  ;  for  they  were  very  malignant,  and  the 
Amorites  dwelt  in  their  stead,  wicked  and  sinful,  and 
there  is  no  people  to-day  which  hath  wrought  to  the 
full  all  their  sins,  and  they  have  no  longer  length  of 
life  on  the  earth.4  12.  And  Jacob  sent  away  Laban, 
and  he  departed  into  Mesopotamia,  the  land  of  the 
East,  and  Jacob  returned  to  the  land  of  Gilead. 

Jacob,  reconciled  with  Esau,  dwells  in  Canaan 
and  supports  his  Parents  (xxix.  13-20;  cf. 
Gen.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.). 

13.  And  he  passed  over  the  Jabbok  6  in  the  ninth 
month,  on  the  eleventh  thereof.  And  on  that  day 
Esau,  his  brother,  came  to  him,  and  he  was  reconciled 
to  him,  and  departed  from  him  unto  the  land  of 
Seir,  but  Jacob  dwelt  in  tents.  14.  And  in  the  first 
2136  a. m  year  0f  the  fifth  week  in  this  jubilee  he  crossed  the 
Jordan,  and  dwelt  beyond  the  Jordan,  and  he  pas- 
tured his  sheep  from  the  sea  |of  the  heapj  8  unto 
Bethshan,7  and  unto  Dothan  and  unto  the  fiorestt  8 
of  Akrabbim.  15.  And  he  sent  to  his  father  Isaac 
of  all  his  substance,  clothing,  and  food,  and  meat, 
and  drink,  and  milk,  and  butter,  and  cheese,  and  some 
dates  of  the  valley,  16.  And  to  his  mother  Rebecca 
also  four  times  a  year,  between  the  times  of  the 
months,  between  ploughing  and  reaping,  and  between 
autumn  and  the  rain  (season)  and  between  winter 

1  In  MT  of  Gen.  xiv.  5,  Asheroth-karnaim  is  one  place; 
but  Syr.  and  some  MSS.  of  LXX  support  our  text.  Karnaim 
was  captured  by  Judas  Maccabacus  (1  Mace.  v.  43  f.). 

■  In  Deut.  iii.  10  "  plain  "  =  miskdr. 

*  =  probably  the  Baan  of  1  Mace.  v.  4  f.,  which  was 
destroyed  by  Judas. 

*  Judas  "  must  have  nearly  annihilated  "  the  Amorites 
(Charles). 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxxii.  22. 

*  Text  corrupt.     I-atin  has  "  from  the  Salt  Sea." 
7  Cf.  1  Mace.  v.  52,  xii.  40. 

■  ?  read  "  ascent  "  (cf.  Num.  xxxiv.  4  ;  Josh.xv.  3).  Judas 
fought  in  this  district  (of  Idumea) ;   cf.  1  Mace.  v.  3. 


chap,  xxix]    THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES         153 

and  spring,  to  the  tower  of;  Abraham.  17.  For 
Isaac  had  returned  from  the  Well  of  the  Oath  and 
gone  up  to  the  tower  of  his  father  Abraham,  and  he 
dwelt  there  apart  from  his  son  Esau.  18.  For  in 
the  days  when  Jacob  went  to  Mesopotamia,  Esau 
took  to  himself  a  wife  Mahalath,  the  daughter  of 
Ishmael,  and  he  gathered  together  all  the  flocks  of 
his  father  and  his  wives,  and  went  up  and  dwelt  on 
Mount  Seir,  and  left  Isaac  his  father  at  the  Well  of 
the  Oath  alone.1  19.  And  Isaac  went  up  from  the 
Well  of  the  Oath  and  dwelt  in  the  tower  of  Abraham 
his  father  on  the  mountains  of  Hebron,  20.  And 
thither  Jacob  sent  all  that  he  did  send  to  his  father 
and  his  mother  from  time  to  time,  all  they  needed, 
and  they  blessed  Jacob  with  all  their  heart  and  with 
all  their  soul. 

Dinah  ravished.  Slaughter  of  the  J^hechem- 
ites.  Laws  against  Intermarriage  be- 
tween Israel  and  the  Heathen.  The  Choice 
of  Levi  (xxx.  1-26;  cf.  Gen.  xxxiv.). 

XXX.  And  in  the  first  year  of  the  sixth  week  he  2143 
went  up  to  Salem,  to  the  east  of  Shechem,  in  peace,2 
in  the  fourth  month.  2.  And  there  they  carried  off 
Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob,  into  the  house  of 
Shechem,  the  son  of  Hamor,  the  Hivite,  the  prince 
of  the  land,  and  he  lay  with  her  and  defiled  her,  and 
she  was  a  little  girl,  a  child  of  twelve  years.  3.  And 
he  besought  his  father  and  her  brothers  that  she 
might  be  given  to  him  to  wife.  And  Jacob  and  his 
sons  were  wroth  because  of  the  men  of  Shechem;8 

1  Cl.  Gen.  xxviii.  9,  xxxvi.  6,  8.  In  contrast  with  Jacob's 
conduct  to  his  parents.  Esau's  is  un filial. 

*  Based  upon  xxxiii.  18  (cf.  R.V.  marg).  Our  text  com- 
bines two  readings  ("  Shalem,"  the  name  of  a  city,  and 
shSlom,  "  peace  "). 

'  Our  author  omits  all  reference  to  the  circumcision  of  the 
Shechemites,  because  he  approves  of  the  conduct  of  Simeon 
and  Levi,  and  extols  it.  On  the  other  hand,  their  conduct 
in  the  matter. is  severely  reprobated  in  Gen.  xlix.  5-7.  Our 
author's  view  seems  to  reflect  a  bitter  feeling  against  the 
people  of  Shechem  which  prevailed  in  his  time. 


154  THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES   [chap,  xxx 

for  they  had  defiled  Dinah,  their  sister,  and  they  spake 
to.  them  with  evil  intent  and* dealt  deceitfully  with 
them    and    beguiled    them.     4.  And    Simeon    and 
Levi  came  unexpectedly  to  Shechem  and  executed 
judgment  on  all  the  men  of  Shechem,  and  slew  all  the 
men  whom  they  found  in  it,  and  left  not  a  single  one 
remaining  in  it :    they  slew  all  in  torments  because 
they  had  dishonoured  their  sister  Dinah.     5.  And 
thus  let  it  not  again  be  done  from  henceforth  that  a 
daughter  of  Israel  be  denied ;  for  judgment  is  ordained 
in  heaven  against  them  that  they  should  destroy  with 
the  sword  all  the  men  of  the  Shechemites  because 
they  had  wrought  shame  in  Israel.     6.  And  the  Lord 
delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  sons  of  Jacob 
that  they  might  exterminate  them  with  the  sword  and 
execute  judgment  upon  them,  and  that  it  might  not 
thus  again  be  done  in  Israel  that  a  virgin  of  Israel 
should  be  defiled.     7.  And  if  there  is  any  man  who 
wisheth  in  Israel  to  give  his  daughter  or  his  sister  to 
any  man  who  is  of  the  seed  of  the  Gentiles  he  shall 
surely  die,  and  they  shall  stone  him  with  stones ;  for 
he  hath  wrought  shame  in  Israel ;  and  they  shall  burn 
the  woman  with  fire,  because  she  hath  dishonoured 
the  name  of  the  house  of  her  father,  and  she  shall  be 
rooted  out  of  Israel.1    8.  And  let  not  an  adulteress 
and  no  uncleanness  be  found  in  Israel   throughout 
all  the  days  of  the  generations  of  the  earth ;  for  Israel 
is  holy  unto  the  Lord,  and  every  man  who  hath  defiled 
(it)  shall  surely  die  :  they  shall  stone  him  with  stones. 
9.  For  thus  hath  it  been  ordained  and  written  in  the 
heavenly  tables  regarding  all  the  seed  of  Israel :    he 
who  defileth  (it)  shall  surely  die,  and  he  shall  be 
stoned  with  stones.     10.  And  to  this  law  there  is  no 
limit  of  days,,and  no  remission,  nor  any  atonement  : 
but  the  man  who  hath  defiled  his  daughter  shall  be 
rooted  out  in  the  midst  of  all  Israel,  because  he  hath 

1  Notice  the  passionate  denunciation  of  mixed  marriages. 
The  burning  of  the  woman  with  fire,  according  to  the  Mosaic 
Law  (Lev.  xxi.  9),  was  reserved  for  the  priest's  daughter  who 
played  the  harlot, 


chap,  xxx]  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES  155 

given  of  his  seed  to  Moloch,1  and  wrought  impiously 
so  as  to  defile  it.     II.  And  do  thou,  Moses,  command 
the  children  of  Israel  and  exhort  them  not  to  give 
their  daughters   to   the   Gentiles,   and   not   to   take 
for  their  sons  any  of  the  daughters  of  the  Gentiles, 
for  this  is  abominable  before  the  Lord.     12.  For  this 
reason  I  have  written  for  thee  in  the  words  of  the  Law 
all  the  deeds  of  the  Shechemites,  which  they  wrought 
against  Dinah,  and  how  the  sons  of  Jacob  spake, 
saying  :    "  We  shall  not  give  our  daughter  to  a  man 
who   is  uncircumcised ;     for   that   were   a   reproach 
unto  us."     13.  And  it  is  a  reproach  to  Israel,  to  those 
who  give,  and  to  those  who  take  the  daughters  of  the 
Gentiles ;     for   this   is   unclean   and   abominable   to 
Israel.      14. *  And  Israel  will  not  be  free  from  this 
uncleanness  if  it  hath  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  the 
Gentiles,  or  hath  given  any  of  its  daughters  to  a  man 
who  is  of  any  of  the  Gentiles.    .15.  For  there  will 
be  plague  upon  plague,  and  curse  upon  curse,  and 
every   judgment   and   plague   and   curse   will   come 
(upon  him)  :  if  he  do  this  thing,  or  hide  his  eyes  from  8 
those  who  commit  uncleanness,  or  those  who  defile 
the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  or  those  who  profane  His 
holy  name,4  (then)  will  the  whole  nation  5  together 
be  judged  for  all  the  uncleanness  and  profanation  of 
this   (man).     16.  And   there   will   be   no   respect   of 
persons  [and  no  consideration  of  persons],'  and  no 
receiving  at  his  hands  of  fruits  and  offerings  and 
burnt-offerings  and  fat,  nor  the  fragrance  of  sweet 
savour,  so  as  to  accept  it:  and  so  fare  every  man  or 
woman  in  Israel  who  defileth  the  sanctuary.     17.  For 

1  Cf.  Lev.  xviii.  21  :  here  the  prohibition  in  Lev.  against 
making  "  any  of  thy  seed  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moiech  " 
is  interpreted  as  =  to  give  one's  child  in  marriage  to  a  Gentile  ; 
so,  also,  Targ.  Ps. -Jonathan  on  this  verse.  In  later  times  the 
rule  has  not  always  been  strictly  enjoined. 

*  14-15  are  based  upon  Lev.  xx.  2-4. 
8  i.  e."  ignore  "  ;   cf.  Lev.  xx.  4. 

4  Cf.  Lev.  xx.  3. 

s  In  Lev.  xx.  5,  only  the  guilty  man's  family  is  involved. 

•  Bracketed  as  a  dittograph. 


156  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES   [chap,  xxx 

this  reason  I  have  commanded  thee,  saying  :  "  Testify 
this  testimony  to  Israel  :  see  how  the  Shechemites 
fared  and  their  sons  :  how  they  were  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  two  sons  of  Jacob,  and  they  slew  them 
under  tortures,  and  it  was  (reckoned)  unto  them  for 
righteousness,  and  it  is  written  down  to  them  for 
righteousness.  18.  And  the  seed  of  Levi  was  chosen 
for  the  priesthood,  and  to  be  Levites,  that  they  might 
minister  before  the  Lord,  as  we,  continually,  and  that 
Levi  and  his  sons  may  be  blessed  for  ever ;  for  he  was 
zealous  to  execute  righteousness  and  judgment  and 
vengeance  on  all  those  who  arose  against  Israel.1 
19.  And  so  they  inscribe  as  a  testimony  in  his  favour 
on  the  heavenly  tables  blessing  and  righteousness 
before  the  God  of  all  :  20.  And  we  remember  the 
righteousness  which  the  man  fulfilled  during  his 
life,  at  all  periods  of  the  year;  until  a  thousand 
generations  they  will  record  it,  and  it  will  come  to 
him  and  to  his  descendants  after  him,  and  he  hath 
been  recorded  on  the  heavenly  tables  as  a  friend  * 
and  a  righteous  man.  21.  All  this  account  I  have 
written  for  thee,  and  have  commanded  thee  to  say  to 
the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  should  not  commit 
sin  nor  transgress  the  ordinances  nor  break  the 
covenant  which  hath  been  ordained  for  them,  (but) 
that  they  should  fulfil  it  and  be  recorded  as  friends.1 
22.  But  if  they  transgress  and  work  uncleanness  in 
every  way,  they  will  be  recorded  on  the  heavenly 
tables  as  adversaries,  and  they  will  be  destroyed  out 
of  the  book  of  life,8  and  they  will  be  recorded  in  the 
book  of  those  who  will  be  destroyed  and  with  those 
who  will  l)e  rooted  out  of  the  earth.     23.  And  on  the 

1  A  different  reason  lor  Levi's  choice  for  the  priesthood  is 
given  in  xxxii.  3;   cf.  also  Test.  Levi  iv.  2. 

'  sc.  of  God. 

1  This  expression,  derived  from  the  O.T.  (cf.  Ps.  lxix.  28; 
Hxod.  xxxii.  32)  had  reference  originally  to  the  temporal 
blessings  of  the  theocracy,  and  this  may  be  its  meaning 
here  ;  but  later  the  meaning  was  extended  to  eternal  life.  It 
occurs  frequently  in  the  N.T.  (cf.  Rev.  iii.  5,  xiii.  8,  etc.); 
cf.  also  1  Enoch  xlvii.  3. 


Cha!\xxx]    THE  BOOK  OE  JUBILEES         157 

day  when  the  sons  of  Jacob  slew  Shechem  a  writing 
was  recorded  in  their  favour  in  heaven  that  they  had 
executed  righteousness  and  uprightness  and  vengeance 
on  the  sinners,  and  it  was  written  for  a  blessing. 
24.  And  they  brought  Dinah,  their  sister,  out  of  the 
house  of  Shechem,  and  they  took  captive  everything 
that  was  in  Shechem,  their  sheep  and  their  oxen  and 
their  asses,  and  all  their  wealth,  and  all  their  flocks, 
and  brought  them  all  to  Jacob  their  father.  25.  And 
he  reproached  them  because  they  had  put  the  city 
to  the  sword ; l  for  he  feared  those  who  dwelt  in  the 
land,  the  Canaanites  and  the  Perizzites.  26.  And 
the  dread  of  the  Lord  was  upon  all  the  cities  which 
are  around  about  Shechem,  and  they  did  not  rise  to 
pursue  after  the  sons  of  Jacob ;  for  terror  had  fallen 
upon  them.2 

Jacob's  Journey  to  Bethel  and  Hebron.     Isaac 
blesses  Levi  and  Judah  (xxxi.  1-25;   cf.  Gen. 

xxxv.). 

XXXI.  And  on  the  new  moon  of. the  month  Jacob 
spake  to  all  the  peoptenf  his~rroUsersaying*T"  Purify 
yourselves  and  change  your  garments,  and  let  us  arise 
and  go  up  to  Bethel,  where  I  vowed  a  vow  to  Him  on 
the  day  when  I  fled  from  the  face  of  Esau  my  brother, 
because  He  hath  been  with  me  and  brought  me  into  this 
land  in  peace,  and  put  ye  away  the  strange  gods  that 
are  among  you."  2.  And  they  gave  up  the  strange 
gods  and  that  which  was  in  their  ears  and  which  was 
|on  their  necks, |3  and  the  idols  which  Rachel  stole 
from  Laban  her  brother  she  gave  wholly  to  Jacob. 
And  he  burnt  and  brake  them  to  pieces  and  destroyed 
them,  and  hid  them  under  an  oak  which  is  in  the  land 
of  Shechem.  3.  And  he  went  up  on  the  new  moon  of 
the  seventh  month  to  Bethel.  And  he  built  an  altar 
at  the  piace  where  he  had  slept,  and  he  set  up  a  pillar 
there,  and  he  sent  word  to  his  father  Isaac  to  come 
to  him  to  his  sacrifice,  and  to  his  mother  Rebecca. 

1  Cf.  Test.  Levi  vi.         ■  Cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  5.         3  Corrupt. 


158         THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES    [chap,  xxxi 

4.  And  Isaac  said  :  "  Let  my  son  Jacob  come,  and  let 
me  see  him  before  I  die."  x     5.  And  Jacob  went  to  his 
father  Isaac  and  to  his  mother  Rebecca,  to  the  house 
of  his  father  Abraham,2  and  he  took  two  of  his  sons 
witli  him,  Levi  and  Judah,  and  he  came  to  his  father 
Isaac  and  to  his  mother  Rebecca.3     6.  And  Rebecca 
came  forth  from  the  tower  to  the  front  of  it  to  kiss 
Jacob  and  embrace  him;    for  her  spirit  had  revived 
when  she  heard  :   "  Behold  Jacob  thy  son  hath  come  "  ; 
and  she  kissed  him.     7.  And  she  saw  his  two  sons, 
and  she  recognised  them,  and  said  unto  him  :    "  Are 
these  thy  sons,  my  son?  "  and  she  embraced  them 
and  kissed  them,  and  blessed  them,  saying:  "  In  you 
shall  the  seed  of  Abraham  become  illustrious,  and  ye 
will  prove  a  blessing  on  the  earth."     8.  And  Jacob 
went  in  to  Isaac  his  father,  to  the  chamber  where  he 
lay,  and  his  two  sons  were  with  him,  and  he  took  the 
hand  of  his  father,  and  stooping  down  he  kissed  him, 
and  Isaac  clung  to  the  neck  of  Jacob  his  son,  and  wept 
upon  his  neck.     9.  And  the  darkness  left  the  eyes  of 
Isaac,  and  he  saw  the  two  sons  of  Jacob,  Levi  and 
Judah,  and  he  said  :    "  Are  these  thy  sons,  my  son  ? 
for  they  are  like  thee."     10.  And  he  said  unto  him 
that   they   were   truly   his  sons  :     "  And   thou    hast 
truly  seen  that  they  are  truly  my  sons."     11.  And 
they  came  near  to  him,  and  he  turned  and  kissed 
them  and  embraced  them  both  together.     12.  And 
the  spirit  of  prophecy  came  down  into  his  mouth,  and 
he  took  Levi  by  his  right  hand  and  Judah  by  his  left. 
13.  And  he  turned  to  Levi  first,4  and  began  to  bless 
him  first,  and  said  unto  him  :    "  May  the  God  of  all, 
the  very  Lord  of  all  the  ages,  bless  thee  and  thy  chil- 
dren throughout  all  the  ages.     14.  And  may  the  Lord 
give  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  fgreatness  and  great 

1  Isaac  refused  to  go  to  Bethel;    cf.  Test.  Levi  ix.  2. 

1  i.  e.  to  Hebron. 

1  This  last  meeting  of  Jacob  with  Isaac  is  not  referred  to 
in  the  Rabbinical  Haggada. 

*  Cf.  Test.  Levi  ix.  if.  The  primacy  of  Levi  is  here 
marked. 


chap,  xxxij    THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES         159 

gloryf,  and  cause  thee  and  thy  seed,  from  among  all 
flesh,  to  approach  Him  to  serve  in  His  sanctuary  as 
the  angels  of  the  presence  and  as  the  holy  ones.1 
(Even)  as  they,  will  the  seed  of  thy  sons  be  for 
glory  and  greatness  and  holiness,  and  may  He  make 
them  great  unto  all  the  ages.  15.  And  they  will  be 
princes  and  judges,  and  chiefs  2  of  all  the  seed  of  the 
sons  of  Jacob ; 

They  will  speak  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  righteous- 
ness, 

And  they  wdl  judge  all  His  judgments  in  righ- 
teousness. 

And  they  will  declare  My  ways  to  Jacob 

And  My  paths  to  Israel. 

The  blessing  of  the  Lord  will  be  given  in  their 
mouths  3 

To  bless  all  the  seed  of  the  beloved.4 

16.  Thy  mother  hath  called  thy  name  Levi, 
And  justly  hath  she  called  thy  name; 
Thou  wilt  be  joined5  to  the  Lord 

And  be  the  companion  of  all  the  sons  of  Jacob ; 

Let  His  table  be  thine,6 

And  do  thou  and  thy  sons  eat  thereof ; 

And  may  thy  table  be  full  unto  all  generations, 

And  thy  food  fail  not  unto  all  the  ages. 

17.  And  let  all  who  hate  thee  fall  down  before  thee, 
And  let   all   thy  adversaries  be   rooted  out  and 

perish  ; 
And  blessed  be  he  that  blesseth  thee, 
And  cursed  be  every  nation  that  curseth  thee. 

1  Levi  is  to  serve  in  the  sanctuary  as  the  two  highest  orders 
of  angels  serve  in  the  highest  heaven. 

2  Levi's  descendants  arc  not  only  to  he  priests  but  also 
rulers  of  the  nation.  This  double  function  was  exercised 
by  the  Maccabean  priest-princes:    cf.  Jest.  Levi  viii.  n  li. 

3  1.  e.  the  priestly  blessing;    cf.  Kcclus.  1.  20. 

4  i.  e.  of  Abraham. 

8  A  play  on  the  nnmc  "  Levi  "  (—  attache") ;  cf.  Gen.  xxix. 
34  (R.V.  marg.)  ;  also  Num.  xviii.  2,  4. 

6  Cf.  Test.  Levi  viii.  16  ("  and  the  table  of  the  Lord  shall 
thy  seed  apportion  "). 


160        THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxi 

18.  And  to  Judah  lie  said  : 

May  the  Lord  give  thee  strength  and  power 

To  tread  down  all  that  hate  thee  ; 

A  prince  shalt  thou  be,  thou  and  one  of  thy  sons,1 

over  the  sons  of  Jacob ; 
May  thy  name  and  the  name  of  thy  sons  2  go  " 

forth  and  traverse  every  land  and  region. 
Then  will  the  Gentiles  fear  before  thy  face, 
And  all  the  nations  will  quake 
[And  all  the  peoples  will  (make].3 

19.  In  thee  shall  be  the  help  of  Jacob, 

And  in  thee  be  found  the  salvation  of  Israel. 

20.  And    when    thou   sittest   on    the   throne   of   the 

honour  of  thy  righteousness, 

There  will  be  great  peace  for  all  the  seed  of  the 
sons  of  the  beloved,4 

And  blessed  will  he  be  that  blesseth  thee ; 

And  all  that  hate  thee  and  afflict  thee  and  curse  thee 

Shall  be  rooted  out  and  destroyed  from  the  earth 
and  accursed." 
21.  And  turning  he  kissed  him  again  and  embraced 
him,  and  rejoiced  greatly  ;  for  he  had  seen  the  sons  of 
Jacob  his  son  in  very  truth.  22.  And  he  went  forth 
from  between  his  feet  and  fell  down  and  worshipped 
him.  And  he  blessed  them.  And  (Jacob)  rested 
there  with  Isaac  his  father  that  night,  and  they  ate 
and  drank  with  joy.  23.  And  he  made  the  two  sons 
of  Jacob  sleep,  the  one  on  his  right  hand  and  the 
other  on  his  left,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righ- 
teousness. 24.  And  Jacob  told  his  father  everything 
during  the  night,  how  the  Lord  had  shown  him  great 
mercy,  and  how  He  had  prospered  (him  in)  all  his 
ways,  and  protected  him  from  all  evil.  25.  And 
Isaac  blessed  the  God  of  his  father  Abraham,  who  had 
not  withdrawn  His  mercy  and  His  righteousness  from 
the  sons  of  His  servant  Isaac. 

1  t.  t.  ?  the  Messiah  who  is  to  spring  from  Judah  :  but  if 
so  the  expression  of  the  hope  is  somewhat  vague.  More 
probably  the  reference  is  to  the  historical  David. 

1  i.  e.  the  name  of  the  Jewish  people. 

*  Bracketed  as  a  dittograph.  *  i.  e.  of  Abraham. 


chap,  xxxi]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES        161 

Rebecca  journeys  with  Jacob  to  Bethel 

(xxxi.  26-32). 

26.  And  in  the  morning  Jacob  told  his  father  Isaac 
the  vow  which  he  had  vowed  to  the  Lord,  and  the 
vision  which  he  had  seen,  and  that  he  had  built  an 
altar,1  and  that  everything  was  ready  for  the  sacrifice 
to  be  made  before  tiic  Lord  as  he  had  vowed,  and  that 
he  had  come  to  set  him  on  an  ass.  27.  And  Isaac 
said  unto  Jacob  his  son  :  "I  am  not  able  to  go  with 
thee ;  for  I  am  old,  and  not  able  to  bear  the  way  : 
go,  my  son,  in  peace  ;  for  I  am  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
hve  years  this  day ;  I  am  no  longer  able  to  journey; 
set  thy  mother  (on  an  ass)  and  let  her  go  with  thee. 

28.  And  I  know,  my  son,  that  thou  hast  come  on  my 
account,  and  may  this  day  be  blessed  on  which  thou 
hast  seen  me  alive,  and  I  also  have  seen  thee,  my  son. 

29.  Mayest  thou  prosper  and  fulfil  the  vow  which 
thou  hast  vowed;  and  put  not  off  thy  vow;  for 
thou  wilt  be  called  to  account  as  touching  the  vow;2 
now  therefore  make  haste  to  perform  it,  and  may  He 
be  pleased  who  hath  made  all  tilings,  to  whom  thou 
hast  vowed  the  vow."  30.  And  he  said  to  Rebecca  : 
"  Go  with  Jacob  thy  son  "  ;  and  Rebecca  went  with 
Jacob  her  son,  and  Deborah  with  her,  and  they  came 
to  Bethel.  31.  And  Jacob  remembered  the  prayer 
with  which  his  father  had  blessed  him  and  his  two 
sons,  Levi  and  Judali,  and  he  rejoiced  and  blessed 
the  God  of  his  fathers,  Abraham  and  Isaac.  32.  And 
he  said  :  "  Now  I  know  that  I  have  an  eternal  hope, 
and  my  sons  also,  before  the  God  of  all ;  "  and  thus 
is  it  ordained  concerning  the  two;  and  they  record 
it  as  an  eternal  testimony  unto  them  on  the  heavenly 
tables  how  Isaac  blessed  them. 

1  At  Bethel;    cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  18-22. 

2  Note  the  emphasis  on  the  obligation  to  keep  a  vow. 


162       THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  -  [chap,  xxxil 

Levi's  Dream  at  Bethel  ;  he  is  appointed  to  the 
Priesthood.  Jacob  celebrates  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  and  offers  Tithes.  The  Insti- 
tution of  Tithes  (xxxii.  1-15 ;  cf.  Gen.  xxxv.). 

XXXII.  And  he  abode  that  night  at  Bethel,  and 
Levi  dreamed  l  that  they  had  ordained  and  made  him 
the  priest  of  the  Most  High  God,2  him  and  his  sons  for 
ever ;  and  he  awoke  from  his  sleep  and  blessed  the 
Lord.  2.  And  Jacob  rose  early  in  the  morning,  on 
the  fourteenth  of  this  month,  and  he  gave  a  tithe  of 
all  that  came  with  him,  both  of  men  and  cattle,  both 
of  gold  and  every  vessel  and  garment,  yea,  he  gave 
tithes  of  all.  3.  And  in  those  days  Rachel  became 
pregnant  with  her  son  Benjamin.  And  Jacob  counted 
his  sons  from  him  3  upwards  and  Levi  fell  to  the 
portion  of  the  Lord,4  and  his  father  clothed  him  in  the 
garments  of  the  priesthood  and  filled  his  hands.5 
4.  And  on  the  fifteenth  of  this  month,  he  brought  to 
the  altar  fourteen  oxen  from  amongst  the  cattle,  and 
twenty-eight  rams,  and  forty-nine  sheep,  and  seven 
lambs,  and  twenty-one  kids  of  the  goats  as  a  burnt- 
offering  on  the  altar  of  sacrifice,  well  pleasing  for  a 
sweet  savour  before  God.8     5.  This  was  his  offering, 

1  Cf.  Test.  Levi  viii.  (which  describes  Levi's  dream-vision 
of  seven  men  in  white  as  having  taken  place  at  Bethel) ; 
also  v.  of  the  same  work  (in  ix.  3  Jacob  has  this  dream  also). 

2  Cf.  Gen.  xiv.  18-20  (Mclchizedek).  The  title,  "  Priest 
of  the  Most  High  God,"  was  appropriated  by  the  Maccabean 
priest-kings.  Apparently  it  was  expected  in  certain  quarters 
that  the  Messiah  would  spring  from  this  priestly  ruling  house; 
cf.  Ps.  ex.,  especially  ver.  4. 

8  i.e.  from  Benjamin. 

4  Levi,  as  the  tenth  son  (counting  backwards  from  Benja- 
min), fell,  under  the  law  of  tithe,  to  the  Lord,  and  was  con- 
secrated to  the  priesthood;  cf.  also  Pirke  de  If.  liliezcr  xxxvii., 
where  Levi  is  counted  (by  a  different  method)  as  tenth  "  and 
was  reckoned  as  the  tithe,  holy  to  God  "  (cf.  Lev.  xxvii.  32). 

6  A  technical  expression  meaning  appointment  to  the 
priesthood;    cf.  Exod.  xxviii.  41  (K.V.  marg.) ;    xxix.  9. 

•  The  number  of  victims  does  not  agree  with  the  pre- 
scriptions of  the  Mosaic  Law  regarding  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles;   cf.  Num.  xxix.  12-40;    Lev.  xxiii.  34-36,  39-44. 


chap,  xxxn]    THE  BOOK   OF  JUBILEES       163 

in  consequence  of  the  vow  which  he  had  vowed  that 
he  would  give  a  tenth,1  with  their  fruit-offerings  and 
their  drink-offerings.     6.  And  when  the  fire  had  con- 
sumed it,  he  burnt  incense  on  the  fire  over  the  fire, 
and  for  a  thank-offering  two  oxen  and  four  rams  and 
four  sheep,  four  he-goats,  and  two  sheep  of  a  year  old, 
and  two  kids  of  the  goats ;   and  thus  he  did  daily  for 
seven  days.     7.  And  he  and  all  his  sons  and  his  men 
were  eating  (this)  with  joy  there  during  seven  days 
and  blessing  and  thanking  the  Lord,  who  had  delivered 
him  out  of  all  his  tribulation  and  had  given  him  his 
vow.     8.  And  he  tithed   all    t lie   clean   animals,  and 
made  a  burnt  sacrifice,  but  1 1  ic  unclean  animals  he 
gave  (not)  to  Levi  his  son,  and  he  gave  him  all  the 
souls  of  the  men.2    9.  And  Levi  discharged  the  priestly 
office  at  Bethel  before  Jacob  his  father  in  preference 
to  his  ten  brothers,  and  he  was  a  priest  there,  and 
Jacob  gave  his  vow  :   thus  he  tithed  again  the  tithe  3 
to  the  Lord  and  sanctified  it,  and  it  became  holy  unto 
Him.     10.  And  for  this  reason  it  is  ordained  on  the 
heavenly  tables  as  a  law  for  the  tithing  again  the 
tithe  to  eat  before  the  Lord  from  year  to  year,4  in 
the  place  where  it  is  chosen  that   His  name  should 
dwell,  and  to  this  law  there  is  no  limit  of  days  for  ever. 
11.  This  ordinance  is  written  that  it  may  be  fulfilled 
from  year  to  year  in  eating  the  second  tithe  before 
the  Lord  in  the  place  where  it  hath  been  chosen,  and 
nothing  shall  remain  over  from  it  from  this  year  to 
the  year  following.     12.  For  in  its  year  shall  the  seed 
be  eaten  till  the  days  of  the  gathering  of  the  seed  of 
the  year,  and  the  wine  till  the  days  of  the  wine,  and 
the  oil  till  the  days  of  its  season.     13.  And  all  that  is 
left  thereof  and  become!  h  old,  let  it   be  regarded  as 
polluted  :    let  it  be  burnt  with  fire,  for  it  is  unclean. 
14.  And    thus    let    them    eat    it     together    in     the 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  22. 

2  Cf.  Test.  Levi  ix.  3  ("  And  he  [Jacob]  paid  tithes  of  all 
to  the  Lord  through  mc  "). 

3  i.  e.  the  second  tithe;    cf.  Num.  xviii.  26. 

4  Cf.  Deut.  xiv.  23  (Tobit  i.  7). 


164.      THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxn 

sanctuary,  and  let  them  not  suffer  it  to  become  old. 
15.  And  all  the  tithes  of  the  oxen  and  sheep  shall  be 
holy  unto  the  Lord,1  and  shall  belong  to  His  priests, 
which  they  will  eat  before  Him  from  year  to  year ; 
for  thus  is  it  ordained  and  engraven  regarding  the  tithe 
on  the  heavenly  tables. 

Jacob's  Visions.  He  celebrates  the  eighth  day 
of  Tabernacles.  The  Birth  of  Benjamin 
and  Death  of  Rachel  (xxxii.  16-34;   cf.  Gen. 

XXXV.). 

16.  And  on  the  following  night,  on  the  twenty- 
second  day  of  this  month,  Jacob  resolved  to  build 
that  place,  and  to  surround  the  court  with  a  wall, 
and  to  sanctify,  it  and  make  it  holy  for  ever,  for  him- 
self and  his  children  after  him.  17.  And  the  Lord 
appeared  to  him  by  night  and  blessed  him  and  said 
unto  him : '  "  Thy  name  shall  not  be  called  Jacob, 
but  Israel  shall  they  name  thy  name."  18.  And  He 
said  unto  him  again  :  "I  am  the  Lord  who  created 
the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  I  shall  increase  thee 
and  multiply  thee  exceedingly,  and  kings  will  come 
forth  from  thee,  and  they  will  judge  everywhere 
wherever  the  foot  of  the  sons  of  men  hath  trodden. 

19.  And  I  shall  give  to  thy  seed  all  the  earth  2  which 
is  under  heaven,  and  they  will  judge  all  the  nations 
according  to  their  desires,  and  after  that  they  will  get 
possession  of  the  whole  earth  and  inherit  it  for  ever." 

20.  And  He  finished  speaking  with  him,  and  He  went 
up  from  him,  and  Jacob  looked  till  He  had  ascended 
into  heaven.3  21.  And  he  saw  in  a  vision  of  the  night, 
and  behold  an  angel  descended  from  heaven  with  seven 
tablets  4  in  his  hands,  and  he  gave  them  to  Jacob, 
and  he  read  them  and  knew  all  that  was  written 
therein  which  would  befall  him  and  his  sons  through- 

1  Cf.  Lev.  xxvii.  32  ;  2  Chron.  xxxi.  6.  These  tithes  are 
not  otherwise  attested  in  the  O.T. 

a  For  17-18  cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  10-12.  Notice  that  the  whole 
inhabited  earth  (not  merely  Palestine,  as  in  Gen.  xxxv.  12) 
is  here  promised  to  Israel. 

•  Cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  13.  4  Cf.  4  Ezra  xiv.  24. 


chap,  xxxn]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES       165 

out  all  the  ages.1  22.  And  he  showed  him  all  that  was 
written  on  the  tablets,  and  said  unto  him  :  "  Do  not 
build  this  place,  and  do  not  make  it  an  eternal  sanc- 
tuary,2 and  do  not  dwell  here;  for  this  is  not  the 
place.  Go  to  the  house  of  Abraham  thy  father  and 
dwell  with  Isaac  thy  father  until  the  day  of  the  death 
of  thy  father,  z].  For  in  Eygpt  thou  wilt  die  in 
peace,  and  in  this  land  thou  wilt  be  buried  with  honour 
in  the  sepulchre  of  thy  fathers,  with  Abraham  and 
Isaac.  24.  hear  not,  lor  as  thou  hast  seen  and  road 
it, 'thus  will  it  all  be;  and  do  thou  write  down  every- 
thing as  thou  hast  seen  and  read."  25.  And  Jacob 
said  :  "  Lord,  how  can  I  remember  all  that  I  have 
read  and  seen?  "  And  he  said  unto  him  :  "  I  will 
bring  all  things  to  thy  remembrance."  3  26.  And  he 
went  up  from  him,  and  he  awoke  from  his  sleep,  and 
he  remembered  everything  which  he  had  read  and 
seen,  and  he  wrote  down  all  the  words  which  he  had 
read  and  seen.  27.  And  he  celebrated  there  yet 
another  day,4  and  he  sacrificed  thereon  according  to 
all  that  he  sacrificed  on  the  former  days,  and  called 
its  name  f"  Addition, "f  5  for  f this  day  was  added,  f  5 
and  the  former  days  he  called  "  The  Feast."  6  28. 
And  thus  it  was  manifested  that  it  should  be,  and  it 
is  written  on  the  heavenly  tables  :  wherefore  it  was 
revealed  to  him  that  he  should  celebrate  it,  and  add 
it  to  the  seven  days  of  the  feast.     2().7  And  its  name 

1  Cf.  xlv.  4. 

a  The  sanctuary  at  Bethel  was  not  to  be  the  one  central 
shrine,  where  alone  acceptable  worship  was  to  be  offered. 

3  In  4  Ezra  xiv.  40,  Ezra's  memory  is  said  to  have  been 
miraculously  strengthened  after  he  had  received  the  cup 
of  inspiration;    cf.  also  John  xiv    26. 

4  i.  c.  the  eighth  day  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

5  The  Hebrew  name  is  asereth  {'asarta),  from  a  root  mean- 
ing "  detain  "  ['fisar).  Hence,  perhaps,  we  may  emend  here 
"  keeping  back,"  for  on  that  clay  he  was  kept  back  (Charles). 

6  So  in  Rabbinic  the  least  of  Tabernacles  was  called. 
par  excellence,  "  the  Feast." 

7  29  is  very  corrupt.     Charles  suggests  that  it  should   be 
read  :     "  And    its  name   was  called    '  a   keeping   back  '    («.  e 
a$ereth)  when  it  was  recorded  amongst  the  days  of  the  feast 
days  in  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  year." 


166       THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxn 

was    called    j"  Addition, ""[    "["because    thatf    it    was 
recorded  amongst  the  days  of  the  feast  days,  "[accord- 
ing to|  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  year.     30.  And 
in    the   night,   on    the   twenty-third   of   this   month, 
Deborah  Rebecca's  nurse  died,  and  they  buried  her 
beneath  the  city  under  the  oak  of  the  river,  and  he 
called  the  name  of  this  place,  "  The  river  of  Deborah," 
and  the  oak,  "  The  oak  of  the  mourning  of  Deborah."1 
31.  And  Rebecca  went  and  returned  to  her  house  to 
his  father  Isaac,  and  Jacob  sent  by  her  hand  rams  and 
sheep  and  he-goats  that  she  should  prepare  a  meal 
for  his  father  such  as  he  desired.     32.  And  he  went 
after  his  mother  till  he  came  to  the  land  of  Kabratan,2 
and  he  dwelt  there.     33.  And  Rachel  bare  a  son  in 
the  night,  and  called  his  name  "  Son  of  my  sorrow  "  ; 
for  she  suffered  in  giving  him  birth  :    but  his  father 
called  his  name  Benjamin,  on  the  eleventh  of    the 
eighth  month  in  the  first  of  the  sixth  week  of  this 
2143  A.M.  jubilee.     34.  And    Rachel   died   there   and   she   was 
buried  in  the  land  3  of  Ephrath,  the  same  is  Bethlehem, 
and  Jacob  built  a  pillar  on  the  grave  of  Rachel,  on  the 
road  a^bove  her  grave. 

Reuben's  Sin  -with  Bilhah.  Laws  regarding 
Incest.  Jacob's  Children  (xxxiii.  1-23;  cf. 
Gen.  xxxv.  21-27). 

XXXIII.  And  Jacob  went  and  dwelt  to  the  south 
of  Magdaladra'ef.4  And  he  went  to  his  father  Isaac, 
he  and  Leah  his  wife,  on  the  new  moon  of  the  tenth 
month.  2.  And  Reuben  saw  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid, 
the  concubine  of  his  father,  bathing  in  water  in  a 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  8  (R.V.  marg). 

2  Due  to  a  misunderstanding  of  the  words  rendered  "  some 
distance  "  (kibrath  hd'are*)  in  Gen.  xxxv.  16.  The  LXX 
also  took  kibrath  to  be  a  proper  name  (XiBpaPo). 

3  "  On  the  way  to  "  in  the  text  of  Gen.  xxxv.  19. 

4  A  compound  of  migdal  ' eder  'ephrath  ("  the  tower  of 
Eder  of  Ephrath  ") ;  cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  21,  also  Test.  Reuben  iii. 
Q-15,  where  the  same  incident  is  narrated.  In  later  Jewish 
tradition  an  explanation  is  given  which  exculpates  Reuben 
(cf.  Targ.  Ps.-Jon.  on  Gen.  xxxv.  22). 


chap,  xxxin]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES     167 

secret  place,  and  he  loved  her.  3.  And  he  hid  himself 
at  night,  and  he  entered  the  house  of  Bilhah  [at  night], 
and  he  found  her  sleeping  alone  on  a  bed  in  her  house. 

4.  And  he  lay  with  her,  and  she  awoke  and  saw,  and 
behold  Reuben  was  lying  with  her  in  the  bed,  and 
she  uncovered  the  border  of  her  covering  and  seized 
him,  and  cried  out,  and  discovered  that  it  was  Reuben. 

5.  And  she  was  ashamed  because  of  him,  and  released 
her  hand  from  him,  and  lie  fled.     6.  And  she  lamented 
because  of  this  thing  exceedingly,  and  did  not  tell  it 
to  anyone.    7.  And  when  Jacob  returned  and  sought 
her,  she  said  unto  him  :    "I  am  not  clean  for  thee, 
for  I  have  been  defiled  as  regards  thee ;   for  Reuben 
hath  defiled  me,  and  hath  lain  with  me  in  the  night, 
and  I  was  asleep,  and   did    not    discover  until  he 
uncovered  my  skirt  and  slept   with  me."     8.  And 
Jacob  was  exceedingly  wroth  with  Reuben  because 
he  had  lain  with  Bilhah,  because   he  had  uncovered 
his  father's  skirt.1    9.  And  Jacob  did  not  approach 
her  again  because  Reuben  had  defiled  her.     And  as 
for  any  man  who  uncovereth  his  father's  skirt  his  deed 
is  wicked  exceedingly,  for  he  is  abominable  before  the 
Lord.     10.  For  this  reason  it  is  written  and  ordained 
on  the  heavenly  tables  that  a  man  should  not  lie 
with  his  father's  wife,  and  should  not  uncover  his 
father's  skirt,  for  this  is  unclean  :    they  shall  surely 
die  together,2  the  man  who  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 
and  the  woman  also,  for  they  have  wrought  unclean- 
ness  on  the  earth.     II.  And  there  shall  be  nothing 
unclean  before  our  God  in  the  nation  which  He  hath 
chosen  for  Himself  as  a  possession.     12.  And  again, 
it  is  written  a  second  time  :   "  Cursed  he  be  who  lieth 
with  the  wife  of  his  father,  for  he  hath  uncovered 
his  father's  shame";    and  all  the  holy  ones  of  the 
Lord  said  "  So  be  it ;   so  be  it."  3    13.  And  do  thou, 
Moses,  command   the  children   of   Israel   that   they 
observe  this  word ;  for  it  (entaileth)  a  punishment  of 
death;  and  it  is  unclean,  and  there  is  no  atonement 

1  Cf.  Deut.  xxii.  30.  *  Cf.  Lev.  xx.  II, 

3  Cf.  Deut.  xxvii.  20. 


1 08     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxm 

for  ever  to  atone  for  the  man  who  hath  committed 
this,  but  he  is  to  be  put  to  death  and  slain,  and  stoned 
with  stones,  and  rooted  out  from  the  midst  of  the 
people  of  our  God.     14.  For  to  no  man  who  doeth  so 
in  Israel  is  it  permitted  to  remain  alive  a  single  day 
on  the  earth,  for  he  is  abominable  and  unclean.     15. 
And  let  them  not  say  :    to  Reuben  was  granted  life 
and  forgiveness  after  he  had  lain  with  his  father's 
concubine,  and  to  her  also  though  she  had  a  husband, 
and  her  husband  Jacob,  his  father,  was  still  alive. 
10.   For  until  that  time  there  had  not  been  revealed 
the  ordinance  and  judgment  and  law  in  its  complete- 
ness for  all,  but  in  thy  days  (it  hath  been  revealed)  as 
a  law  of  seasons  and  of  days,  and  an  everlasting  law 
for  the    everlasting   generations.1      17.  And  for  this 
law  there  is  no  consummation  of  days,  and  no  atone- 
ment for  it,  but  they  must  both  be  rooted  out  in  the 
midst  of  the  nation  :   on  the  day  whereon  they  com- 
mitted it  they  shall  slay  them.     18.  And  clo  thou, 
Moses,    write    (it)    down    for   Israel    that   they   may 
observe  it,  and  do  according  to  these  words,  and  not 
commit  a  sin  unto  death ;  2   for  the  Lord  our  God  is 
judge,  who  respecteth  not  persons  and  accepteth  not 
gifts.3    19.  And  tell  them  these  words  of  the  covenant, 
that   they  may  hear  and  observe,  and   be  on   their 
guard  with  respect  to  them,  and  not  be  destroyed  and 
rooted  out  of  the  land  ;    for  an  uncleanncss,  and  an 
abomination,  and  a  contamination,  and  a  pollution 
are  all  they  who  commit  it  on  the  earth  before  our 
God.     20.  And  there  is  no  greater  sin  than  the  forni- 
cation which  they  commit  on  earth;    for  Israel  is  a 
holy  nation  unto  the  Lord  its  God,  and  a  nation  of 
inheritance,  and  a  priestly  and  royal  nation  and  for 
(His  own)  possession;4    and  there  shall  no  such  un- 
cleanncss appear  in   the  midst  of  the  holy  nation. 
2145  a.m.   21.   And  in  the  third  year  of  this  sixth  week  Jacob 
and  all  his  sons  went  and  dwelt  in  the  house  of  Abra- 

1  "  Where    there    is    no    law    there    is    no    transgression  " 
(Horn.  iv.  15). 

2  Cf.  xxi.  22.  3  Cf.  v.  16,  xl.  8. 
4  Cf.  xvi.  18  (note). 


chap,  xxxin]     THE   HOOK   OF   JUBILEES      169 

ham,  near  Isaac  his  father  and  Rebecca  his  mother. 
22. l  And  these  were  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  : 
the  first-born  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar, 
Zebulon,  the  sons  of  Leah  ;  and  the  sons  of  Rachel, 
Joseph  and  Benjamin;  and  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  Dan 
and  Naphtali ;  and  the  sons  of  Zilpali,  Gad  and  Asher  ; 
and  Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Leah,  the  only  daughter 
of  Jacob.  23.  And  they  came  and  bowed  themselves 
to  Isaac  and  Rebecca,  and  when  they  saw  them  thev 
blessed  Jacob  and  all  his  sons,  and  Isaac  rejoiced 
exceedingly,  for  he  saw  the  sons  of  Jacob,  his  younger 
son,  and  he  blessed  them. 

War  of  the  Amorite  Kings  against  Jacob  and 
his  Sons.  Joseph  sold  into  Egypt  (cf.  Gen. 
xxxvii).  The  Death  of  Bilhah  and  Dinah 
(xxxiv.  1-19). 

XXXIV.  And  in  the  sixth  year  of  this  week  of  this  2x48  A.M. 
forty-fourth  jubilee  Jacob  sent  his  sons  to  pasture  1 

their  sheep,  and  his  servants  with  them,  to  the  pas- 
tures of  Shechem.  2.2  And  the  seven  kings  of  the 
Amorites  assembled  themselves  together  against 
them,  to  slay  them,  hiding  themselves  under  the  trees, 
and  to  take  thoir  cattle  as  a  prey.  3.  And  Jacob  and 
Levi  and  Judah  and  Joseph  were  in  the  house  with 
Isaac  their  father;  lor  his  spirit  was  sorrowful,  and 
they  could  not  leave  him  :  and  Benjamin  was  the 
youngest,  and  for  this  reason  remained  with  his 
lather.     4.   And  there  came  the  king[s]3  of  Taphu,4 

1  For  22  cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  2^-27. 

2  The  account  given  in  2-8  of  the  conquest  of  Shechem 
is  given  in  a  fuller  form  in  the  lest.  Judah  iii.-vii.,  and  in 
the  Midrash  Wajjissau  (cf.  Gastcr,  Chronicles  of  Jerahweel, 
pp.  80-87).  The  legend  evidently  has  an  old  basis,  for  it 
harmonizes  with  the;  statement  Riven  in  Gen.  xlviii.  22, 
which  refers  to  Jacob's  conquest  of  Shechem  (cf.  R.V.  margin). 
This  form  of  the  story  is  obviously  independent  of,  and 
possibly  older  than,  that  Riven  in  Gen.  xxxiv. 

3  Read  "  king." 

4  —  Tappuah  (Josh,  xv  53,  xvi.  8).  It  is  the  Tephon 
mentioned  in  1  Mace.  ix.  50.  This  and  the  following  places 
mentioned  may  have  been  specially  interesting  to  our  author 
because  of  events  connected  with  them  in  Maccabean  times. 


170      THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxiv 

and  the  king[s]  l  of  f'Aresa.t  2  and  the  kingfs]  *  of 
Seragan,3  and  the  king^s]  l  of  Selo,4  and  the  king[s]  1 
of  da'as,5  and  the  king  of  Betho.on,6  and  the  king  of 
jMa'anisakir.f  7  and   all   those   who   dwell  in   these 
mountains  (and)  who  dwell  in  the  woods  in  the  land 
of  Canaan.     5.  And  they  announced  this  to  Jacob 
saying  :   "  Behold,   the   kings  of   the  Amorites  have 
surrounded  thy  sons,  and  plundered  their  herds."    6. 
And  he  arose  from  his  house,  he  and  his  three  sons  and 
all  the  servants  of  his  father,  and  his  own  servants, 
and  he  went  against  them  with  six  thousand  8  men, 
who  carried  swords.     7.  And  he  slew  them  in  the 
pastures  of  Shechem,  and  pursued  those  who  fled, 
and  he  slew  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  he 
slew  9  fAresaj  and  Taphu  and  Saregan  and  Seld  and 
f'Amanisakirf  and  Ga[ga]'as,  and  he  recovered  his 
herds.     8.  And  he  prevailed  over  them,  and  imposed 
tribute  on  them  that  they  should  pay  him  tribute, 
five  fruit  products  of  their  land,  and  he  built  Robel  lu 
and  Tamnatares:11    9.  And  he  returned  in  peace,  and 
made  peace  with  them,  and  they  became  his  servants, 
until  the  day  that  he  and  his  sons  went  down  into 
2149  a.m.  Egypt.     10. 12  And  in  the  seventh  year  of  this  week 
he  sent   Joseph  to  learn  about  the  welfare  of  his 
brothers  from  his  house  to  the  land  of  Shechem,  and 
he  found  them  in  the  land  of  Dothan.     11.  And  they 
dealt   treacherously   with   him,   and   formed   a   plot 
against  him  to  slay  him,  but  changing  their  minds, 

1  Read  "  king." 

2  Read  "  Asor,"  t.  e.  Hazor,  the  scene  of  a  great  victory  by 
Jonathan,  1  Mace.  xi.  67  ff. 

•  Unknown.  k  i.e.  Shiloh. 
1   =  ?  Gaash  (Josh.  xxiv.  30). 

•  The- scene   of   more  than  one   Maccabean   victory;     cf. 
1  Mace.  iii.  13'ff .,  vii.  39  ft. 

7  Corrupt  for  "  Shakir-Maani." 

•  Another  reading  is  "  800." 

•  Six  out  of  the  seven  kings  are  slain;    so  Test.  Judah  iv. 
[For  the  names  see  notes  on  4  above.] 

10  Perhaps  corrupt  for  "  Arbael  "  =  Arbela  (1  Mace.  ix.  2). 
»    =  Timnath-heres  (Jud.  ii.  9);    cf.  1  Mace.  ix.  50. 
12  For  10-11  cf.  Gen.  xxxvii.  12  ff. 


chap,  xxxiv]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES      171 

they  sold  him  to  Ishmaelite  merchants,  and  they 
brought  him  down  into  Egypt,  and  they  sold  him  to 
Potiphar,  the  eunuch  1  of  Pharaoh,  the  chief  of  the 
cooks,2  priest  of  the  city  of  'Flew.3  12.  And  the  sons 
of  Jacob  slaughtered  a  kid,  and  dipped  the  coat  of 
Joseph  in  the  blood,  and  sent  (it)  to  Jacob  their  father 
on  the  tenth  of  the  seventh  month.  13.  And  he 
mourned  all  that  night,  for  they  had  brought  it  to 
him  in  the  evening,  and  he  became  feverish  with 
mourning  for  his  death,  and  he  said  :  "  An  evil  beast 
hath  devoured  Joseph  "  ;  and  all  the  members  of 
his  house  [mourned  with  him  that  day,  and  they]  4 
were  grieving  and  mourning  with  him  all  that  day. 

14.  And  his  sons  and  his  daughter  rose  up  to  comfort 
him,  but  he  refused  to   be  comforted  for  his   son. 

15.  And  on  that  day  Bilhah  heard  that  Joseph  had 
perished,  and  she  died  mourning  him,  and  she  was 
living  in  f£)afratef,f  5  and  Dinah  also,  his  daughter, 
died  after  Joseph  had  perished.  And  there  came 
these  three  mournings  upon  Israel  in  one  month.  16. 
And  they  buried  Bilhah  over  against  the  tomb  of 
Rachel, and  Dinah  also,  his  daughter,  they  buried  there. 
17.  And  he  mourned  for  Joseph  one  year,  and  did 
not  cease,  for  he  said  "  Let  me  go  down  to  the  grave 
mourning  for  my  son."  *  18.  For  this  reason  7  it  is 
ordained  for  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  should 
afflict  themselves  8  on  the  tenth  of  the  seventh  month 
— on  the  day  that  the  news  which  made  him  weep 
for  Joseph  came  to  Jacob  his  father — that  they 
should  make  atonement  for  themselves  thereon  with 
a  young  goat  on  the  tenth  of  the  seventh  month, 

1  Or  "  court  official." 

2  So   LXX    of    Gen.   xxxvii.    36    (apx^dyttpoi),   misunder- 
standing the  Hebrew  (=  "  captain  of  the  guard"). 

3  i.e.   Hcliopolis    (LXX    H\lnv   ir6\«at,   Gen.    xli.   45,   50), 
i.  e.  "  On." 

*  Bracketed  as  a  dittograph. 

6  ?  =  "  Kabratan,"  xxxii.  32.         •  Cf.  Gen.  xxxvii.  35. 

7  The  reason  here  given  for  the  institution  of  the  Day  of 
Atonement  (cf.  Lev.  xvi.)  seems  to  be  peculiar  to  our  IJook. 

8  =      fast,"  cf.  Lev.  xvi.  31,  etc. 


172      THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxiv 

once  a  year,  for  their  sins;  for  they  had  grieved  the 
affection  of  their  father  regarding  Joseph  his  son. 
19.  And  this  day  hath  been  ordained  that  they  should 
grieve  thereon  for  their  sins,  and  for  all  their  trans- 
gressions and  for  all  their  errors,  so  that  they  might 
cleanse  themselves  on  that  day  once  a  year. 

The  Wives  of  Jacob's  Sons  (xxxiv.  20-21). 

20.  And  after  Joseph  perished,  the  sons  of  Jacob 
took  unto  themselves  wives.  The  name  of  Reuben's 
wife  is  'Ada  ;  and  the  name  of  Simeon's  wife  is  'Adiba'a, 
a  Canaanite  ;  l  and  the  name  of  Levi's  wife  is  Melka,2 
of  the  daughters  of  Aram,  of  the  seed  of  the  sons  of 
Terah  ;  and  the  name  of  Judah's  wife,  Betasu'el,3  a 
Canaanite  ;  and  the  name  of  Issachar's  wife,  Hezaqa ; 
and  the  name  of  Zebulon's  wife,  jNi'imant ;  4  and 
the  name  of  Dan's  wife,  'Egla;  and  the  name  of 
Naphtali's  wife,  Rasu'u,  of  Mesopotamia;  and  the 
name  of  Gad's  wife,  Maka ;  and  the  name  of  Asher's 
wife,  Tjona  ;  and  the  name  of  Joseph's  wife,  Asenath,6 
the  Egyptian  ;  and  the  name  of  Benjamin's  wife, 
'Ijasaka.  21.  And  Simeon  repented,  and  took  a 
second  wife  from  Mesopotamia  as  his  brothers. 

Rebecca's  Last  Admonitions  and  Death 

(xxxv.  1-27). 

2157  a.m.  XXXV.  And  in  the  first  year  of  the  first  week  of 
the  forty-fifth  jubilee  Rebecca  called  Jacob,  her  son, 
and  commanded  him  regarding  his  father  and  regard- 
ing his  brother'  that  he  should  honour  them  all  the 
days  of  his  life.     2.  And  Jacob  said  :    "  I  will  do 

1  Cf.  Gen",  xlvi.  10.  According  to  xxx.  7  ff .  such  a  marriage 
(with  a  Canaanitish  woman)  was  punishable  with  death. 

2  Cf .  Test.  Levi  xi.  1. 

3  Cf.  xli.  7.  The  name  goes  back  to  "  Bath-shua  "  (1.  e. 
"  daughter  of  Shua  ") ;  cf.  Test.  Judah  viii.  2,  etc.;  cf.  Gen. 
xxxviii.  2. 

4  The  name  is  doubtful.     Some  Ethiopic  MSS.  omit  it. 
6  Cf.  Gen.  xli.  45. 


chap,  xxxv]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES       173 

everything  as  thou  hast  commanded  me ;  for  this 
thing  will  be  honour  and  greatness  to  me,  and  right- 
eousness before  the  Lord,  that  1  should  honour  them. 

3.  And  thou  too,  mother,  knowest  from  the  time  I 
was  born  until  this  day,  all  my  deeds  and  all  that  is 
in  my  heart,  that  I  always  think  good  concerning  all. 

4.  And  how  should  I  not  do  this  thing  which  thou  hast 
commanded  me,  that  I  should  honour  my  father  and 
my  brother  !     5.  Tell  me,  mother,  what  perversity 
hast  thou  seen  in  me  and  I  shall  turn  away  from  it, 
and  mercy  will  be  upon  me."     (>.  And  she  said  unto 
him  :   "  My  son,  I  have  not  seen  in  thee  all  my  days 
any  perverse  but  (only)  upright  deeds.     And  yet  I 
shall  tell  thee  the  truth,  my  son  :    I  shall  die  this 
year,  and  I  shall  not  survive  this  year  in  my  life; 
for  I  have  seen  in  a  dream  the  day  of  my  death,  that 
I  should  not  live  beyond  a  hundred  and  fifty-five 
years  :    and  behold  J  have  completed  all  the  days  of 
my  life  which  I  am  to  live."     7.  And  Jacob  laughed 
at  the  words  of  his  mother,  because  his  mother  had 
said  unto  him  that  she  should  die  ;  and  she  was  sitting 
opposite  to  him  in  possession  of  her  strength,  and  she 
was  not  infirm  in  her  strength ;    for  she  went  in  and 
out  and  saw,  and  her  teeth  were  strong,  and  no 
ailment  had  touched  her  all  the  days  of  her  life.     8. 
And  Jacob  said  unto  her  :    "  Blessed  am  I,  mother, 
if  my  days  approach  the  days  of  thy  life,  and  my 
strength  remain  with  me  thus  as  thy  strength  :    and 
thou  wilt  not  die,  for  thou  art  jesting  idly  with  me 
regarding  thy  death."     9.  And  she  went  in  to  Isaac 
and  said  unto   him  :     "  One   petition   I   make  unto 
thee  :  make  Esau  swear  that  he  will  not  injure  Jacob, 
nor  pursue  him  with  enmity  ;  for  thou  knowest  Esau's 
thoughts  that  they  are  perverse  from  his  youth,  and 
there  is  no  goodness  in  him  ;  for  he  desireth  after  thy 
death  to  kill  him.     10.  And  thou  knowest  all  that  he 
hath  done  since  the  day  Jacob  his  brother  went  to 
Haran  until  this  day ;  how  he  hath,  forsaken  us  with 
his  whole  heart,  and  hath  done  evil  to  us;  thy  flocks 
he   hath  taken   to   himself,  and  carried  off   all   thy 


174       THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xxxv 

possessions  from  before  thy  face.     II.  And  when  we 
implored  and  besought  him  for  what  was  our  own, 
he  did  as  a  man  who  was  taking  pity  on  us.     12.  And 
he  is  bitter  against  thee  because  thou  didst  bless  Jacob 
thy  perfect  and  upright  son ;   for  there  is  no  evil  but 
only  goodness  in  him,  and  since  he  came  from  Haran 
unto  this  day  he  hath  not  robbed  us  of  aught,  for  he 
bringeth  us  everything  in   its  season   always,    and 
rejoiceth  with  all  his  heart  when  we  take  at  his  hands, 
and  he  blesseth  us,  and  hath  not  parted  from  us  since 
he  came  from  Haran  until  this  day,  and  he  remaineth 
with  us  continually  at  home  honouring  us."     13.  And 
Isaac  said  unto  her :  "I,  too,  know  and  see  the  deeds 
of  Jacob  who  is  with  us,  how  that  with  all  his  heart  he 
honoureth  us ;    but  I  loved  Esau  formerly  more  than 
Jacob,  because  he  was  the  first-born ;  but  now  I  love 
Jacob  more  than  Esau,  for  he  hath  done  manifold 
evil  deeds,  and  there  is  no  righteousness  in  him,  for 
all  his  ways  are  unrighteousness  and  violence,  [and 
there   is  no   righteousness   around   him].1     14.  And 
now  my  heart  is  troubled  because  of  all  his  deeds,  and 
neither  he  nor  his  seed  is  to  be  saved,  for  they  are 
those  who  will  be  destroyed  from  the  earth,  and  who 
will  be  rooted  out  from  under  heaven,  for  he  hath  for- 
saken the  God  of  Abraham  and  gone  after  his  wives 
and  after  their  uncleanness  and  after  their  error,  he 
and  his  children.     15.  And  thou  dost  bid  me  make 
him  swear  that  he  will  not  slay  Jacob,  his  brother ; 
even  if  he  swear  he  will  not  abide  by  his  oath,  and  he 
will  not  do  good  but  evil  only.     16.  But  if  he  desireth 
to  slay  Jacob,  his  brother,  into  Jacob's  hands  will  he 
be  given,  and  he  will  not  escape  from  his  hands,  [for 
he  will  descend  into  his  hands.]  2    17.  And  fear  thou 
not  on  account  of  Jacob ;  for  the  guardian  3  of  Jacob 
is  great  and  powerful  and  honoured,  and  praised  more 
than  the  guardian  of  Esau."     18.  And  Rebecca  sent 

1    ?  a  dittograph. 

1    ?  bracketed  words  a  gloss;   cf.  xxxvi.  9. 
•    ?  the  gifardian-angel ;    cf.  Matt,  xviii.  10;    Acts  xii.  15; 
Heb.  i.  14. 


chap,  xxxv]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES        175 

and  called  Esau,  and  he  came  to  her,  and  she  said 
unto  him  :  "  I  have  a  petition,  my  son,  to  make 
unto  thee,  and  do  thou  promise  to  do  it,  my  son." 

19.  And  he  said  :  "  I  will  do  everything  that  thou 
sayest  unto  me,  and  I  will  not  refuse  thy  petition." 

20.  And  she  said  unto  him  :   "  I  ask  you  that  the  day 
I  die,  thou  wilt  take  me  in  and  bury  me  near  Sarah, 
thy  father's  mother,  and  that  thou  and  Jacob  will 
love  each  other,   and   that   neither  will   desire  evil 
against  the  other,  but  mutual  love  only,  and  (so)  ye 
will  prosper,  my  sons,  and  be  honoured  in  the  midst 
of  the  land,  and  no  enemy  will  rejoice  over  you,  and 
ye  will  be  a  blessing  and  a  mercy  in  the  eyes  of  all 
those  that  love  you."     21.  And  he  said  :    "I  will  do 
all  that  thou  hast  told  me,  and  I  shall  bury  thee  on 
the  day  thou  diest  near  Sarah,  my  father's  mother, 
as  thou  hast  desired  that  her  bones  may  be  near  thy 
bones.     22.  And   Jacob,    my    brother,   also,    I    shall 
love  above  all  flesh  ;  for  I  have  not  a  brother  in  all  the 
earth  but  him  only  :    and  this  is  no  great  merit  for 
me  if  I  love  him  ;    for  he  is  my  brother,  and  we  were 
sown  together  in   thy  body,  and  together  came  we 
forth  from  thy  womb,  and  if  I  do  not  love  my  brother, 
whom  shall  1  love?     23.  And  I,  myself,  beg  thee  to 
exhort  Jacob  concerning  me  and  concerning  my  sons, 
for  I  know  that  he  will  assuredly  be  king  over  me  and 
my  sons,  for  on  the  clay  my  lather  blessed  him  he 
made  him  the  higher  and  me  the  lower.     24.  And  I 
swear  unto  thee  that  I  shall  love  him,  and  not  desire 
evil  against  him  all  the  days  of  mv  life  but  good  only." 
And   he   sware   unto   her   regarding  all   this   matter. 
25.  And  she  called  Jacob  before  the  eyes  of   Esau, 
and  gave  him  commandment  according  to  the  words 
which  she  had  spoken  to  Esau.     26.  And  he  said  : 
"  I  shall  do  thy  pleasure;    believe  me  that  no  evil 
will  proceed  from  me  or  from  my  sons  against  Esau, 
and  1  shall  be  first  in  naught  save  in  love  only."     27. 
And  they  ate  and  drank,  she  and  her  sons  that  night, 
and  she  died,  three  jubilees  and  one  week  and  one 
year  old,  on  that  night,  and  her  two  sons,  Esau  and 


176        THE    BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxv 

Jacob,  buried  her  in  the  double  cave  1  near  Sarah, 
their  father's  mother. 

Isaac's    Last    Words    and    Admonitions  :     his 
Death.     The  Death  of  Leah   (xxxvi.  1-24). 

2162  a.m.  XXXVI.  And  in  the  sixth  year  of  this  week  Isaac 
called  his  two  sons,  Esau  and  Jacob,  and  they  came 
to  him,  and  he  said  unto  them  :  "  My  sons,  I  am  going 
the  way  of  my  fathers,  to  the  eternal  house  2  where 
my  fathers  are.  2.  Wherefore  bury  me  near  Abraham 
my  father,  in  the  double  cave  in  the  field  of  Ephron 
the  Ilittite,  where  Abraham  purchased  a  sepulchre 
to  bury  in  ;  in  the  sepulchre  which  I  digged  for  myself, 
there  bury  me.  3.  And  this  I  command  you,  my 
sons,  that  ye  practise  righteousness  and  uprightness 
on  the  earth,  so  that  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  you 
all  that  the  Lord  said  that  he  would  do  to  Abraham 
and  to  his  seed.  4.  And  love  one  another,  my  sons, 
your  brothers3  as  a  man  who  loveth  his  own  soul,  and 
let  each  seek  in  what  he  may  benefit  his  brother,  and 
act  together  on  the  earth ;  and  let  them  love  each 
other  as  their  own  souls.  5.  And  concerning  the 
question  of  idols,  I  command  and  admonish  you  to 
reject  them  and  hate  them,  and  love  them  not;  for 
they  are  full  of  deception  for  those  that  worship  them 
and  for  those  that  bow  down  to  them.  6.  Remember 
ye,  my  sons,  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  your  father, 
and  how  I  too  worshipped  Him  and  served  Him  in 
righteousness  and  in  joy,  that  He  might  multiply 
you  and  increase  your  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven  in 
multitude,  and  establish  you  on  the  earth  as  the  plant 
of  righteousness  4  which  will  not  be  rooted  out  unto 
all  the  generations  for  ever.  7.  And  now  1  shall  make 
you  swear  a  great  oath — for  there  is  no  oath  which  is 
greater  than  it  by  the  name  glorious  and  honoured 

1  i.  e.  Machpelah. 

a  Cf.   Eccles.  xii.   5    ("  man  goeth   to  his  long  home,"  lit. 
"  to  his  eternal  house  "). 

3  "  Your  brothers  "  probably  a  gloss. 
*  Cf.  i.  16,  xvi.  26,  xxi.  24. 


chap,  xxxvi]     THE   BOOK    OF   JUBILEES      177 

and  great  and  splendid  and  wonderful  and  mighty, 
which  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  things 
together — that  ye  will  fear  Him  and  worship  Him. 
8.  And  that  each  will  love  his  brother  with  affection 
and  righteousness,  and  that   neither  will   desire  evil 
against  his  brother  from  henceforth  for  ever  all  the 
days  of  your  life,  so  that  ye  may  prosper  in  all  your 
deeds  and  not  be  destroyed.     9.  And  if  either  of  you 
deviseth  evil  against    his   brother,    know   that    from 
henceforth  every  one  that  deviseth  evil  against  his 
brother  will  fall  into  his  hand,  and  will  be  rooted  out 
of  the  land  of  the  living,  and  his  seed  will  be  destroyed 
from  under  heaven.     10.  But  on  the  day  of  turbulence 
and  execration  and  indignation  and  anger,  with  flam- 
ing devouring  fire  as   He   burnt  Sodom,  so  likewise 
will  He  burn  his  land  and  his  city  and  all  that  is  his, 
and  he  will  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  the  discipline 
of  the  children  of  men,  and  not  be  recorded  in  the 
book  of  life,1  but  in  that  which  is  appointed  to  destruc- 
tion, and  he  will  depart  into  eternal  execration  ;    so 
that  their  condemnation  may  be  always  renewed  in 
hate    and    in     execration     and     in     wrath     and    in 
torment   and    in    indignation    and    in    plagues    and 
in  disease   for  ever.     n.  I   say  and  testify  to  you, 
my  sons,  according  to  the  judgment  which  will  come 
upon   the   man  who  wisheth  to  injure  his  brother." 
12.  And  he  divided  all  his  possessions  between  the 
two  on  that  flay,  and  he  gave  the  larger  portion  to 
him  that  was  the  first-born,  and  the  tower  and  all 
that  was  about  it.  and  all  that  Abraham  possessed  at 
the  Well  of  the  Oath.     13.  And  he  said,  "  This  larger 
portion  I  shall  give  to  the  first-born."     14.  And  Esau 
said,  "  I  have  sold  to  Jacob  and  given  my  birthright 
to  Jacob;  to  him  let  it  be  given,  and  I  have  not  a 
single  word  to  say  regarding  it,  for  it  is  his."     15.   And 
Isaac  said,  "  May  a  blessing  rest  upon  you,  my  sons, 
and  upon  your  seed  this  day,  for  ye  have  given  me 
rest,  and  my  heart  is  not  pained  concerning  the  birth- 
right, lest  thou  shouldest  work  wickedness  on  account 

1  Cf.  xxx.  22. 
M 


178      THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxvi 

of  it.  16.  May  the  Most  High  God  l  bless  the  man 
that  worketh  righteousness,  him  and  his  seed  for 
ever."  17.  And  he  ended  commanding  them  and 
blessing  them,  and  they  ate  and  drank  together  before 
him,  and  he  rejoiced  because  there  was  one  mind 
between  them,  and  they  went  forth  from  him  and 
rested  that  day  and  slept.  18.  And  Isaac  slept  on 
his  bed  that  day  rejoicing;  and  he  slept  the  eternal 
sleep,  and  died  one  hundred  and  eighty  years  old. 
He  completed  twenty-five  weeks  and  five  years ;  and 
his  two  sons  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him.2  19.  And 
Esau  went  to  the  land  of  Edom,  to  the  mountains  of 
Seir,  and  dwelt  there.  20.  And  Jacob  dwelt  in  the 
mountains  of  Hebron,  in  the  tower  of  the  land  of  the 
sojournings  of  his  father  Abraham,  and  he  worshipped 
the  Lord  with  all  his  heart  and  according  to  the 
visible  commands  according  as  He  had  divided  the 
days  of  his  generations.3  21.  And  Leah  his  wife  died 
2167  a.m.  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  second  week  of  the  forty- 
fifth  jubilee,  and  he  buried  her  in  the  double  cave  near 
Rebecca  his  mother,  to  the  left  of  the  grave  of  Sarah, 
his  father's  mother.  22.  And  all  her  sons  and  his 
sons  came  to  mourn  over  Leah  his  wife  with  him,  and 
to  comfort  him  regarding  her,  for  he  was  lamenting 
her.  23.  For  he  loved  her  exceedingly  after  Rachel 
her  sister  died  ;  for  she  was  perfect  and  upright  in  all 
her  ways  and  honoured  Jacob,  and  all  the  days  that 
she  lived  with  him  he  did  not  hear  from  her  mouth  a 
harsh  word,  for  she  was  gentle  and  peaceable  and 
upright  and  honourable.  24.  And  he  remembered 
all  her  deeds  which  she  had  done  during  her  life,  and 
he  lamented  her  exceedingly;  for  he  loved  her  with 
all  his  heart  and  with  all  his  soul. 

1  This  divine  title  occurs  frequently  in  our  Book,  and  in 
Kcclus.  (48  times), and  Daniel  (13  tunes).  In  the  Pentateuch, 
outside  Gen.  xiv.  (where  it  occurs  lour  times),  it  is  only  found 
twice.   Its  use  was  revived  in  Ap.  Bar.  (23  times),  and  in  4  Ezra. 

2  Cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  29. 

3  These  commands  had  been  made  visible  to  Jacob  on  the 
seven  tables  which  the  angel  had  shown  him  in  a  vision; 
cf.  xxxii.  21. 


chap,  xxxvil]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     179 

Esau  and  his  Sons  wage  War  with  Jacob 

(xxxvii.  1-25). 

XXXVII.1  And  on  the  day  that  Isaac  the  father  2162  a.m. 
of  Jacob  and  Esau  died,  the  sons  of  Esau  heard  that 
Isaac  had  given  the  portion  of  t he  elder  to  his  younger 
son  Jacob  and  they  were  very  angry.  2.  And  they 
strove  with  their  father,  saying  :  "  Why  hath  thy 
father  given  Jacob  the  portion  of  the  elder  and  passed 
over  thee,  although  thou  art  the  elder  and  Jacob  the 
younger?  '  3.  And  he  said  unto  them  "  Because  I 
sold  my  birthright  to  Jacob  for  a  small  mess  of  lentils  ; 
and  on  the  day  my  father  sent  me  to  hunt  and  catch 
and  bring  him  something  that  he  should  eat  and  bless 
me,  he  came  with  guile  and  brought  my  father  food 
and  drink,  and  my  father  blessed  him  and  put  me 
under  his  hand.  4.  And  now  our  father  hath  caused 
us  to  swear,  me  and  him,  that  we  shall  not  mutually 
devise  evil,  either  against   his   brother,  and   that   we  1 

shall  continue  in  love  and  in  peace  each  with  his 
brother  and  not  make  our  ways  corrupt."  2  5.  And 
they  said  unto  him,  "  We  shall  not  hearken  unto  thee 
to  make  peace  with  him  ;  for  our  strength  is  greater 
than  his  strength,  and  we  are  more  powerful  than  he ; 
we  shall  go  against  him  and  slay  him,  and  destroy  him 
and  his  sons.  And  if  thou  wilt  not  go  with  us,  we 
shall  do  hurt  to  thee  also.  6.  And  now  hearken  unto 
us  :    Let  us  send  to  Aram  3  and  Philistia  4  and  Moab 

1  The  legend  of  the  wars  between  the  sons  of  Jacob  and 
Esau  contained  in  chaps,  xxxvii. -xxxviii.  here  seems  to 
be  ancient.  It  is  also  found  in  Test.  Judah  ix.  and  in  the 
Jewish  Midrashic  literature.  Our  text  contains  the  oldest 
form. 

2  This  representation  gives  a  favourable  view  of  Esau's 
own  attitude.  Jn  the  later  form  of  the  legend  (in  the  Yalkut) 
this  is  altered  to  Esau's  disadvantage. 

3  The  peoples  mentioned  here  and  in  the  contrxt  nearly 
all  played  a  prominent  part  in  the  campaigns  of  the  Maccabees. 
"Aram,"  i.e.  Syria,  was,  of  course,  the  suz.erain  power  in 
their  day,  who  sought  to  oppress  the  Jews,  and  whose  yoke 
was  ultimately  entirely  thrown  off. 

*  Cf.  xxiv.  28  (note). 


i8o    THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES     [chap.  XxXvi! 

and  Amrnon,1  and  let  us  choose  for  ourselves  chosen 
men  who  are  ardent  for  battle,  and  let  us  go  against 
him  and  do  battle  with  him,  and  let  us  exterminate  him 
from   the  earth  before  he  growetli  strong."     7.  And 
their  father  said  unto  them,  "  Do  not  go  and  do  not 
make  war  with  him  lest  ye  fall  before  him."     8.  And 
they  said  unto  him,  "  This  too,  is  exactly  thy  mode 
of  action  from  thy  youth  until  this  day,  and  thou 
art  putting  thy  neck  under  his  yoke.     We  shall  not 
hearken  to  these  words."     9.  And  they  sent  to  Aram, 
and  to  'Aduram  2  to  the  friend  of  their  father,  and  they 
hired  along  with  them  one  thousand   fighting  men, 
chosen  men  of  war.    10.  And  there  came  to  them  from 
Moab  and  from  the  children  of  Amnion,  those  who 
were    hired,    one    thousand   chosen    men,    and    from 
Philistia,  one  thousand  chosen  men  of  war,  and  from 
Edom  3  and  from  the  Horites  one  thousand  chosen 
fighting  men,  and  from  the  Kittim  4  mighty  men  of 
war.    n.  And  they  said  unto  their  father  :  "  Go  forth 
with  them  and  lead  them,  else  we  shall  slay  thee." 
12.   And  he  was  filled  with  wrath  and  indignation  on 
seeing  that  his  sons  were  forcing  him  to  go  before 
(them)  to  lead  them  against  Jacob  his  brother.     13. 
But  afterward  he  remembered  all  the  evil  which  lay 
hidden  in  his  heart  against  Jacob  his  brother ;  and 
lie  remembered  not  the  oath  which  he  had  sworn  to 
his  father  and  to  his  mother  that  he  would  devise  no 
evil  all  his  days  against  Jacob  his  brother.     14.  And 
notwithstanding  all  this,  Jacob  knew  not  that  they 
were  coming  against  him  to  battle,  and  he  was  mourn- 
ing for  Leah,  his  wife,  until  they  approached  very 
near  to  the   tower  with  four  thousand  warriors  and 
chosen   men  of  war.     15.  And  the  men  of   Hebron 
sent  to  him  saying,  "  Behold  thy  brother  hath  come 
against  thee,  to  fight  thee,  with  four  thousand  girt 
with  the  sword,  and  they  carry  shields  and  weapons  "  ; 
for  they  loved  Jacob  more  than  Esau.    So  they  told 
him ;    for  Jacob  was  a  more  liberal  and  merciful  man 

1  Cf.  1  Mace.  v.  6-8.  %  An  Aramaean;    ef.  xxxviii.  3. 

*  Cf.  1  Mace.  v.  3,  65  (also  iv.  29.  61).  4  Cf.  xxiv.  28. 


chap  xxxvn]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     181 

than  Esau.  16.  But  Jacob  would  not  believe  until 
they  came  very  near  to  the  tower.  17.  And  he  closed 
the  gates  of  the  tower ;  and  he  stood  on  the  battle- 
ments and  spake  to  his  brother  Esau  and  said,  "  Noble 
is  the  comfort  wherewith  thou  hast  come  to  comfort 
me  for  my  wife  who  hath  died.  Is  this  the  oath  that 
thou  didst  swear  to  thy  father  and  again  to  thy 
mother  before  they  died?  Thou  hast  broken  the 
oath,  and  on  the  moment  that  thou  didst  swear  to 
thy  father  wast  thou  condemned."  18.  And  then 
Esau  answered  and  said  unto  him,  "  Neither  the 
children  of  men  nor  the  beasts  of  the  earth  have  any 
oath  of  righteousness  which  in  swearing  they  have 
sworn  (an  oath  valid)  for  ever ;  but  every  day  they 
devise  evil  one  against  another,  and  how  each  may 
slay  his  adversary  and  foe.  ig.  And  thou  dost  hate 
me  and  my  children  for  ever.  And  there  is  no  observ- 
ing the  tie  of  brotherhood  with  thee.  20.  Hear  these 
words  which  I  declare  unto  thee, 

If  the  boar  can   change  its  skin   and   make  its 
bristles  as  soft  as  wool, 

Or  if  it  can  cause  horns  to  sprout  forth  on  its  head 
like  the  horns  of  a  stag  or  of  a  sheep, 

Then  shall  I  observe  the  tie  of  brotherhood  with 
thee.1 
[And  if  the  breasts  separated  themselves  from  their 
mother;   for  thou  hast  not  been  a  brother  to  me.]  2 

21.  And  if  the  wolves  make  peace  with  the  lambs  so 

as  not  to  devour  or  do  them  violence, 
And  if  their  hearts  are  towards  them  for  good, 
Then  there  will  l>e  peace  in  my  heart  towards 

thee. 

22.  And  if  the  lion  becometh  the  friend  of  the  ox  and 

maketh  peace  with  him, 

1  For  the  construction  of  such  sayings  cf.  the  rebuke  ad- 
ministered to  Akiba  (when  the  latter  recognized  Bar-Kokba 
as  the  Messiah)  by  Jochanan  ben  Torta  :  "  Sooner  shall 
grass  grow  from  thv  beard,  Akiba,  than  that  Messiah  should 
appear."     The  "  boar  "  may  symbolize  Esau. 

2  Charles  thinks  the  bracketed  words  may  be  out  of  place 
or  corrupt. 


182     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxvii 

And  if  he  is  bound  under  one  yoke  with  him  and 

plougheth  with  him, 
Then  shall  I  make  peace  with  thee. 

23.  And  when  the  raven  becometh  white  as  the  raza,1 
Then  know  that  I  have  loved  thee 

And  shall  make  peace  with  thee. 
Thou  shalt  be  rooted  out, 
And  thy  sons  shall  be  rooted  out, 
And  there  shall  be  no  peace  for  thee." 

24.  And  when  Jacob  saw  that  he  was  (so)  evilly  dis- 
posed towards  him  with  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul 
as  to  slay  him,  and  that  he  had  come  springing  like  the 
wild  boar  which  cometh  upon  the  spear  that  pierceth 
and  killeth  it,  and  recoileth  not  from  it ;  25.  Then  he 
spake  to  his  own  and  to  his  servants  that  they  should 
attack  him  and  all  his  companions. 

The  War  between  Jacob  and  Esau  at  the  Tower 
of  Hebron.  The  Death  of  Esau  and  Over- 
throw of  his  Forces  (xxxviii.  1-14). 

XXXVIII.  And  after  that  Judah  spake  to  Jacob, 
his  father,  and  said  unto  him  :  "  Bend  thy  bow, 
father,  and  send  forth  thy  arrows  and  cast  down  the 
adversary  and  slay  the  enemy ;  and  mayest  thou  have 
the  power,  for  we  shall  not  slay  thy  brother,  for  he  is 
such  as  thou,  and  he  is  like  thee  :  let  us  give  him 
(this)  honour."  2.  Then  Jacob  bent  his  bow  and  sent 
forth  the  arrow  and  struck  Esau,  his  brother,  (on  his 
right  breast)  and  slew  him.2  3.  And  again  he  sent 
forth  an  arrow  and  struck  'Adoran  the  Aramaean,3 
on  the  left  breast,  and  drove  him  backward  and  slew 
him.  4.  And  then  went  forth  the  sons  of  Jacob, 
they  and  their  servants,  dividing  themselves  into 
companies  on  the  four  sides  of  the  tower.     5.  And 

1  "  A  large  white  bird  which  eats  grasshoppers  "  (Isenberg, 
quoted  by  Charles). 

1  According  to  later  Jewish  tradition  Esau  was  killed  by 
Chushim,  son  of  Dan,  at  the  cave  of  Machpelah  when  Jacob's 
corpse  had  arrived  there  for  burial;  cf.  Ptrhe  de  11.  Eliezer 
xxxix.  (towards  end). 

3  Cf.  xxxvii.  9. 


chap,  xxxvin]     THE   BOOK  OF  JUBILEES     183 

Judah  went  forth  in  front,  and  Naphtali  and  Gad" 
with  him  and  fifty  servants  with  him  on  the  south 
side  of  the  tower,  and  they  slew  all  they  found  before 
them,  and  not  one  individual  of  them  escaped.     6. 
And  Levi  and  Dan  and  Asher  went  forth  on  the  east 
side  of  the  tower,  and  fifty  (men)  with  them,  and  they 
slew  the  fighting  men  of  Moab  and  Ammon.     7.  And 
Reuben  and  Issachar  and  Zebulon  went  forth  on  the 
north  side  of  the  tower,  and  fifty  men  with  them,  and 
they  slew  the  fighting  men  of  the  Philistines.     8.  And 
Simeon    and    Benjamin    and    Enoch,    Reuben's   son, 
went  forth  on  the  west  side  of  the  tower,  and  fifty 
(men)  with  them,  and  they  slew  of  Edom  and  of  the 
Horites  four  hundred  men,  stout  warriors;    and  six 
hundred  fled,  and  four  of  the  sons  of  Esau  fled  with 
them,   and   left   their   father  lying  slain,   as   he   had 
fallen  on  the  hill  which  is  in  'Aduram.1     9.  And  the 
sons  of  Jacob  pursued  after  them  to  the  mountains 
of  Seir.     And  Jacob  buried  his  brother  on  the  hill 
which  is  in  'Aduram,  and  he  returned  to  his  house. 
10.  And  the  sons  of  Jacob  pressed  hard  upon  the  sons 
of  Esau  in  the  mountains  of  Seir,  and  bowed  their 
necks  so  that  they  became  servants  of  the  sons  of 
Jacob.     11.  And  they  sent  to  their  father  (to  inquire) 
whether  they  should  make  peace  with  them  or  slay 
them.     12.   And  Jacob  sent  word  to  his  sons  that  they 
should  make  peace,  and  they  made  peace  with  them, 
and  placed  the  yoke  of  servitude  upon  them,  so  that 
they  paid  tribute  fo  Jacob  and  to  his  sons  always. 
13.  And  they  continued  to  pay  tribute  to  Jacob  until 
the  day  that  he  went  clown  into  Egypt.2    14.  And  the 
sons  of  Edom  have  not  got  quit  of  the  yoke  of  servi- 
tude which  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  had  imposed  on 
them  until  this  day.3 

1  A  city  in  ldumaca  (Edom)  identical  with  the  "  Adora 
mentioned    in    i    M.icc.   xiii.    20.      It  was  captured   by    John 
Hyrcanus    and     forced     to    accept    circumcision.     In     Test. 
Judah  ix.  3  the  name  appears  as  Aiioviram. 

2  For  1 1  -1 3  cf.  Test.  Judah  ix.  7-8. 

8  1.  e.  the  author's  day.     Edom  was  finally  made  tributary 
to  Israel  by  John  Hyrcanus. 


1 84    THE  BOOK  OF   JUBILEES'    [chap,  xxxviii 

The  Kings  of  Edom  (xxxviii.  15-24;   cf.  Gen. 
xxxvi.  31-39). 

15.  And  these  are  the  kings  that  reigned  in  Edom 
before  there  reigned  any  king  over  the  children  of 
Israel  [until  this  day]  in  the  land  of  Edom.     16.  And 
Balaq,1  the  son  of  Beor,  reigned  in  Edom,  and  the 
name  of  his  city  was  Danaba.2    17.  And  Balaq  died, 
and  Jobab,  the  son  of  Zara.  of  B6ser,3  reigned  in  his 
stead.     18.  And  Jobab  died,  and  'Asam,4  of  the  land 
of  Teman,  reigned  in  his  stead.     19.  And  'Asam  died, 
and  'Adath,5  the  son  of  Barad,8  who  slew  Midian  in 
the  field  of  Moab,  reigned  in  his  stead,  and  the  name 
of  his  city  was  Avith.     20.  And  'Adath  died,  and 
Salman,7  from  'Amaseqa,8  reigned  in  his  stead.     21. 
And  Salman  died,  and  Saul  of  Ra'ab6th  •  (by  the) 
river,  reigned  in  his  stead.     22.  And  Saul  died,  and 
Ba'elunan,10  the  son  of  Achbor,  reigned  in  his  stead. 
23.  And   Ba'elunan,  the  son  of  Achbor,  died,  and 
'Adath  n  reigned  in  his  stead,  and  the  name  of  his 
wife  was  Maitabith,12  the  daughter  of  Matarat,13  the 
daughter  of  Metab&lza'ab.14    24.  These  are  the  kings 
who  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom. 

Joseph '8    Service  with   Potiphar  ;    his   Purity 

and  .  Imprisonment    (xxxix.    1-13 ;    cf.   Gen. 
xxxix.). 

XXXIX.  And  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  of  his 
father's  sojournings  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  2.  These 
are  the  generations  of  Jacob.  And  Joseph  was  seven- 
teen years  old  16  when  they  took  him  down  into  the 
land  of  Egypt,  and  Potiphar,  an  eunuch  of  Pharaoh, 

I  LXX  (Gen.  xxxvi.  22)  BaAa*  =  Heb.  Beta. 

»  MT  Dinhabah.  »  MT  Bozrah. 

•  LXX  'Aff6ii,  MT  Husham.  *  MT  Hadad. 

•  LXX  Bafa9,  MT  Bedad.  7  LXX  2aAa^,  MT  Samlah. 

•  MT  Masrekah.  •  LXX  'PowfiAd,  MT  Rehoboth. 
10  LXX  BaXatwdv,  MT  Baal-hanan.  ll  MT  Hadar. 

II  MT  Mehetabel.  "  MT  Matted  (LXX  Marpade). 
14  MT  Me-zahab.  16  Cf.  Gen.  xxxvii.  2. 


chap,  xxxix]     THE   BOOK    OF   JUBILEES      185 

the  chief  cook  x  bought  him.     3.  And  he  set  Joseph 
over  all  his  house,  and  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  came 
upon  the  house  of  the  Egyptian  on  account  of  Joseph, 
and  the  Lord  prospered  him  in  all  that  lie  did.     4. 
And   the   Egyptian   committed   everything  into   the 
hands  of  Joseph  ;    for  he  saw  that  the  Lord  was  with 
him,  and  that  the  Lord  prospered  him  in  all  that  he 
did.     5.  And   Joseph's  appearance  was  comely  and 
verv  beautiful  was  his  appearance,  and  his  master's 
wife  lifted  up  her  eves  and  saw  Joseph,  and  she  loved 
him,  and  besought  him  to  he  with  her.     6.  But  he 
did  not  surrender  his  soul,  and  he  remembered  the 
Lord  and  the  words  which  Jacob,  his  father,  used  to 
read  from  amongst  t lie  words  of  Abraham,2  that  no 
man  should  commit   fornication  with  a  woman  who 
hath  a  husband  ;    that   for  him   t lie    punishment   of 
death  hath  been  ordained  in  the  heavens  before   the 
Most  High  God,  and  the  sin  will  be  recorded  against 
him  in  the  eternal  books  continually  before  the  Lord. 
7.  And  Joseph  remembered  these  words  and  refused 
to  lie  with  her.     8.   And  she  besought  him  for  a  year, 
but   he   refused   and   would    not   listen.     9.   But   she 
embraced  him  and  held  him  fast  in  the  house  in  order 
to  force  him  to  he  with  her,  and  closed  the  doors  of 
the  house  and  held  him  fast  ;   but  he  left  his  garment 
in  her  hands  and  broke  through  the  door  and  fled 
without  from  her  presence,     to.  And  the  woman  saw 
that  he  would  not  lie  with  her,  and  she  calumniated 
him  in  the  presence  of  his  lord,  saying  :  "  Thy  Hebrew 
servant,  whom   thou   lovest,  sought  to   force   me  so 
that  he  might  lie  with  me  ;   and  it  came  to  pass  when 
I  lifted  up  my  voice  that  he  fled  and  left  his  garment 
in  my  hands  when  I  held  him,  and  he  brake  through 
the  door."     n.  And  the  Egyptian   saw  the  garment 
of  Joseph  and  the  broken  door,  and  heard  the  words 
of  his  wife,  and  cast  Joseph  into  prison  into  the  place 
where  the  prisoners  were    kept  whom    the  king  im- 
prisoned.    12.  And  he  was  there  in  the  prison;    and 
the  Lord  gave  Joseph  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  chief 
1  Cf.  xxxiv.  11  (note).  2  Cf.  xx.  4,  xxv.  7. 


186      THE  BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xxxix 

of  the  prison  guards  and  compassion  before  him,  for 
he  saw  that  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  that  the  Lord 
made  all  that  he  did  to  prosper.  13.  And  he  com- 
mitted all  things  into  his  hands,  and  the  chief  of  the 
prison  guards  knew  of  nothing  that  was  with  him,1 
for  Joseph  did  everything,  and  the  Lord  perfected  it. 

Joseph  interprets  the  Dreams  of  the  Chief 
Butler  and  the  Chief  Baker  (xxxix.  14-18 ; 
cf.  Gen.  xl.). 

14.  And  he  remained  there  two  years.2     And  in 
those  days  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  was  wroth  against 
his  two  eunuchs,  against  the  chief  butler  and  against 
the  chief  baker,  and  he  put  them  in  ward  in  the  house 
of  the  chief  cook,3  in  the  prison  where  Joseph  was 
kept.     15.  And  the  chief  of  the  prison  guards  ap- 
pointed Joseph  to  serve  them ;-  and  he  served  before 
them.  ^    16.  And  they  both  dreamed  a  dream,  the  chief 
butler  and  the  chief  baker,  and  they  told  it  to  Joseph. 
17.  And  as  he  interpreted  to  them  so  it  befell  them, 
and  Pharaoh  restored  the  chief  butler  to  his  office, 
and  the  (chief)  baker  he  slew,  as  Joseph  had  inter- 
preted   to    them.     18.  But    the   chief    butler   forgot 
Joseph  in  the  prison,  although  he  had  informed  him 
what  would  befall  him,  and  did    not    remember  to 
inform  Pharaoh  how  Joseph  had  told  him     for  he 
forgot. 

Pharaoh's  Dreams  and  their  Interpretation. 
Joseph's  Elevation  and  Marriage  (xl;  1-13 ; 
cf.  Gen.  xli.). 

XL.  And  in  .those  days  Pharaoh  dreamed  two 
dreams  in  one  night  concerning  a  famine  which  was 
to  be  in  all  the  land,  and  he  awoke  from  his  sleep  and 
called  all  the  interpreters  of  dreams  that  were  in 
Egypt,  and  magicians,  and  told  them  his  two  dreams, 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxxix.  8.  2  Cf.  Gen.  xli.  1. 

3  Cf-  xxxiv.  11  (note). 


chap,  xl]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  187 

and  they  were  not  able  to  declare  (them).     2.  And 
then  the  chief  butler  remembered  Joseph  and  spake 
of  him  to  the  king,  and  he  brought  him  forth  from  the 
prison,  and  he  told  his  two  dreams  before  him.     3. 
And  he  said  before  Pharaoh  that  his  two  dreams  were 
one,  and  he  said  unto  him  :    "  Seven  years  will  come 
(in  which  there  will  be)  plenty  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  after  that  seven  years  of  famine,  such  a 
famine  as  hath  not  been  in  all  the  land.     4.  And  now 
let   Pharaoh  appoint  overseers  l  in   all  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  let   them  store  up   food  in  every  city 
throughout  the  days  of  the  years  of  plenty,  and  there 
will  be  food  for  the  seven  years  of  famine,  and  the 
land  will  not  perish  through  the  famine,  for  it  will 
be    very   severe."     5.  And    the    Lord    gave    Joseph 
favour  and  mercy  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  Pharaoh 
said  unto  his  servants  :    "  We  shall  not  find  such  a 
wise  and  discreet  man  as  this  man,  for  the  spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  with  him."     6.  And  he  appointed  him 
the  second  in  all  his  kingdom  and  gave  him  authority 
over  all  Egypt,  and  caused  him  to  ride  in  the  second 
chariot  of  Pharaoh.     7.  And   he  clothed  him  with 
byssus  garments,  and  lie  put  a  gold  chain  upon  his 
neck,  and  (a  herald)  proclaimed  before  him  "  'El  'El 
wa'  Abirer,"2  and  he  placed  a  ringon  his  hand  and  made 
him  ruler  over  all  his  house,  and  magnified  him,  and 
said  unto  him  :  "  Only  on  the  throne  shall  I  be  greater 
than  thou."     8.  And  Joseph  ruled  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  all  the  princes  of  Pharaoh,  and  all  his 
servants,  and  all  who  did  the  king's  business  loved 
him,  for  he  walked  in  uprightness,  for  he  was  with- 
out pride  and  arrogance,  and  he  had  no  respect    of 
persons,  and  did  not  accept  gifts,  but  he  judged  in 
uprightness  all  the  people  of  the  land      9.  And  the 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xli.  34. 

2  'El  'El  wa  'Abirer  —  Hcb.  'el  'el  wa'dbir  'el,  "  God,  God, 
the  mighty  one  of  God."  This  is  a  peculiar  amplification  of 
the  Hebrew  'abrc.k  (11. V.  "  bow  the  knee  ")  of  Gen.  xli.  43. 
"  Mighty  one  of  God  "  may  be  a  technical  term  for  a  gTeat 
magician;    cf.  Acts  viii.  10. 


1 88  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xl 

land  of  Egypt  was  at  peace  before  Pharaoh  because 
of  Joseph,  for  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  gave  him 
favour  and  mercy  for  all  his  generations  before  all 
those  who  knew  him  and  those  who  heard  concerning 
him,  and  Pharaoh's  kingdom  was  well  ordered,  and 
there  was  no  Satan  1  and  no  evil  person  (therein). 
10.  And  the  king  called  Joseph's  name  Sephanti- 
phans,2  and  gave  Joseph  to  wife  the  daughter  of 
Potiphar,  the  daughter  of  the  priest  of  Heliopolis, 
the  chief  cook.3  n.  And  on  the  day  that  Joseph 
stood  before  Pharaoh  he  was  thirty  years  old  [when 
he  stood  before  Pharaoh].  12.  And  in  that  year 
Isaac  died.  And  it  came  to  pass  as  Joseph  had  said 
in  the  interpretation  of  his  two  dreams,  according 
as  he  had  said  it,  there  were  seven  years  of  plenty  over 
all  the  land  of  l^gypt,  and  the  land  of  Egypt  produced 
abundantly,  one  measure  (producing)  eighteen  hun- 
dred measures.  13.  And  Joseph  gathered  food  into 
every  city  until  they  were  full  of  corn  until  they  could 
no  longer  count  and  measure  it  for  its  multitude. 

Judah's  Incest  with  Tamar  ;    his  Repentance 
and  Forgiveness  (xli,  1-28;  Cf.  Gen.  xxxviii.). 

2165  a.m.  XLI.  And  in  the  forty-fifth  jubilee,  in  the  second 
week,  (and)  in  the  second  year,  Judah  took  for  his 
first-born  Er,  a  wife  from  the  daughters  of  Aram,4 
named  Tamar.  2.  But  he  hated,  and  did  not  lie 
with  her,  because  his  mother  was  of  the  daughters  of 
Canaan,  and  he  wished  to  take  him  a  wife  of  the 
kinsfolk  of  his  mother,  but  Judah,  his  father,  would 
not  permit  him.     3.  And  this  Er,  the  first-born  of 

1  A  sign  of  great  felicity;    cf.  xxiii.  29. 

2  t.  e.  Zaphenath-paneah  (Gen.  xli.  45). 

8  The  author  identifies  Potiphar  of  Gen.  xxxvii.  36  with 
Potiphera  of  Gen.  xli.  45.  In  later  Jewish  legend  Asenath 
(Joseph's  wife)  is  represented  as  a  Jewess,  a  daughter  of 
Dinah,  who  was  brought  up  in  the  family  of  Potiphera  (cf. 
Pirke  de  R.  Eliezer  xxxviii).  The  difficulty  of  Joseph's 
heathen  marriage  is  thus  removed. 

4  Cf.  Test.  Judah  x.  ("  from  Mesopotamia  "). 


Chap,  xn]     THE  BOOK   OF   JUBiLhhb  189 

Judah,  was  wicked,  and  the  Lord  slew  him.     4.   And 

Judah  said  unto  Onan,  his  brother  :    "  Go  in  unto 

thy  brother's  wife  and  perform  the  duty  of  a  husband's 

brother  unto  her,1  and  raise  up  seed  unto  thy  brother." 

5.  And  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  would  not  be  his, 

(but)  his  brother's  only,  and  he  went  into  the  house 

of  his  brother's  wife,  and  spilt  the  seed  on  the  ground. 

and  he  was  wicked  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  He 

slew    him.     6.  And    Judah    said    unto    Tamar,    his 

daughter-in-law  :     "  Remain    in    thy    father's    house 

as  a  widow  till  Shelah   my  son   be  grown  up,  and   I 

shall  give  thee  to  him  to  wife."     7.  And  he  grew  up; 

but  Bedsu'el,2  the  wife  of  Judah,  did  not  permit  her 

son    Shelah   to   marry.     And    Bedsu'el,    the    wife   of 

Judah,  died  in   the  fifth   tvnr  of  this  week.     8.   And  2l68  A  M- 

in  the  sixth  year  Judah  went  up  to  shear  his  sheep  at  2l,,r>  a.m. 

Timnah.     And    they    told    Tamar:      "Behold    thy 

father-in-law  goeth  up  to  Timnah  to  shear  his  sheep." 

9.  And  she  put  off  her  widow's  clothes,  and  put  on  a 

veil,  and  adorned  herself,  and  sat  in  the  gate  adjoining 

the  way  to  Timnah.      10.  And  as  Judah  was  going 

along  he  found  her,  and  thought  her  to  be  an  harlot, 

and  he  said  unto  her  :   "  Let  me  come  in  unto  thee  "  ; 

and  she  said  unto  him  :    "  Come  in,"  and  he  went  in. 

11.  And  she  said  unto  him  :    "  dive  me  my  hire  "  ; 

and  he  said  unto  her  :    "  I  have  nothing  in  my  hand 

save  my  ring  that  is  on  my  finger,  and  my  necklace, 

and  my  staff  which  is  in  my  hand."     12.  And  she 

said  unto  him  :    "  Give  them  to  me  until  thou  dost 

send  me  my  hire  "  ;    and  he  said  unto  her  :    "  I  will 

send  unto  thee  a  kid  of  the  goats  "  ;  and  he  gave  them 

to  her,  (and  he  went  in  unto  her,)  and  she  conceived 

by  him.     13.  And  Judah  went  unto  his  sheep,  and 

she  went  to  her  father's  house.      14.   And  Judah  sent 

a  kid  of  the  goats  by  the  hand  of  his  shepherd,  an 

Adullamite,  and  lie  found  her  not  ;   and  he  asked  the 

people  of  the  place,  saying  :    "  Where  is  the  harlot 

who  was  here?  '      And  they  said  unto  him  :    "  There 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xxxviii.  8;    Dcut.  xxv.  5. 

2  i.e.   Bathshua;    cf.  xxxiv.  20. 


igo  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xn 

is  no  harlot  here  with  us."  15.  And  lie  returned  and 
informed  him;  and  said  unto  him  that  lie  had  not 
found  her ;  "  I  asked  the  people  of  the  place,  and  they 
said  unto  me  :  '  There  is  no  harlot  here.'  "  And  he 
said  :  "  Let  her  keep  (them)  lest  we  become  a  cause  of 
derision."  16.  And  when  she  had  completed  three 
months,  it  was  manifest  that  she  was  with  child,  and 
they  told  Judah,  saying :  "  Behold  Tamar,  thy 
daughter-in-law,  is  with  child  by  whoredom."  17. 
And  Judah  went  to  the  house  of  her  father,  and  said 
unto  her  father  and  her  brothers  :  "  Bring  her  forth, 
and  let  them  burn  her,1  for  she  hath  wrought  unclean- 
ness  in  Israel."  18.  And  it  came  to  pass  when  they 
brought  her  forth  to  burn  her  that  she  sent  to  her 
father-in-law  the  ring  and  the  necklace,  and  the  staff, 
saying  :  "  Discern  whose  are  these,  for  by  him  am  I 
with  child."  io,.  And  Judah  acknowledged,  and 
said  :  "  Tamar  is  more  righteous  than  I  am.  And 
therefore  let  them  burn  her  not."  20.  And  for  that 
reason  she  was  not  given  to  Shelah,  and  he  did  not 
again  approach  her.  21.  And  after  that  she  bare 
21 70  a.m.  two  sons,  Perez  and  Zerah,  in  the  seventh  year  of 
this  second  week.  22.  And  thereupon  the  seven 
years  of  fruitfulness  were  accomplished,  of  which 
Joseph  spake  to  Pharaoh.2  23.  And  Judah  acknow- 
ledged that  the  deed  which  he  had  done  was  evil,  for 
he  had  lain  with  his  daughter-in-law,  and  he  esteemed 
it  hateful  in  his  eyes,  and  he  acknowledged  that  he 
had  transgressed  and  gone  astray;  for  he  had  un- 
covered the  skirt  of  his  son,  and  he  began  to  lament 
and  to  supplicate  before  the  Lord  because  of  his 
transgression.  24.  And  we  told  him  in  a  dream  that 
it  was  forgiven  him  because  he  supplicated  earnestly, 
and  lamented,  and  did  not  again  commit  it.  25.  And 
he  received  forgiveness  because  he  turned  from  his 

1  The  punishment  appointed  for  such  an  offence  on  the 
part  of  a  priest's  daughter  (Lev.  xxi.  9);  cf.  xxx.  7  above. 
According  to  the  Targum  (Ps.-Jon.),  on  Gen.  xxxviii.  6,  24, 
Tamar  was  the  daughter  of  a  priest. 

'  Ci.  Gen.  xli.  53. 


chap,  xli]      THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES         191 

sin  and  from  his  ignorance,  for  he  transgressed 
greatly  before  our  God;  and  every  one  that  acteth 
thus,  every  one  who  lie t li  with  his  mother-in-law,  let 
them  burn  him  with  fire  that  he  may  burn  therein,1 
for  there  is  uncleanness  and  pollution  upon  them  ; 
with  fire  let  them  burn  them.  26.  And  do  thou 
command  the  children  of  Israel  that  there  be  no 
uncleanness  amongst  them,  for  every  one  who  lieth 
with  his  daughter-in-law  2  or  with  his  mother-in-law 
hath  wrought  uncleanness ;  with  fire  let  them  burn 
the  man  who  hath  lain  with  her,  and  likewise  the 
woman,  and  He  will  turn  away  wrath  and  punishment 
from  Israel.  27.  And  unto  Judah  we  said  that  his 
two  sons  had  not  lain  with  her,  and  for  this  reason 
his  seed  was  established  for  a  second  generation, 
and  would  not  be  rooted  out.  28.  For  in  singleness 
of  eye  he  had  gone  and  sought  for  punishment,  namely, 
according  to  the  judgment  of  Abraham,3  which  he  had 
commanded  his  sons,  Judah  had  sought  to  burn  her 
with  fire. 


The  Two  Journeys  of  the  Sons  of  Jacob  to 
Egypt  (xlii.  1-25;   cf.  Gen.  xlii.,  xliii.). 

XLII.  And  in  the  fust  year  of  the  third  week  of  2171  a  m. 
the  forty-fifth  jubilee  the  famine  began  to  come  into 
the  land,  and  the  lain  refused  to  be  given  to  the  earth, 
for  none  whatever  fell.  2.  And  the  earth  grew 
barren,  but  in  t lie  land  of  Egypt  there  was  food,  for 
Joseph  had  gathered  the  seed  of  the  land  in  the  seven 
years  of  plenty  and  had  preserved  it.4  3.  And  the 
Egyptians  came  to  Joseph  that  he  might  give  them 
food,  and  he  opened  the  storehouses  where  was  the 
grain  of  the  first  year,  and  he  sold  it  to  the  people  of 
the  land  for  gold.5  4.  (Now  the  famine  was  very  sore 
in  the  land  of  Canaan),  and  Jacob  heard  that  there 

1  Cf.  Lev.  xx.  14. 

2  Cf.  Lev.  xviii.   15,  xx    12   (mode  of  death  not  specified; 
but  Gen.  xxxviii.  24   presupposes  burning  by  fire). 

3  Cf.  xx.  4  (note).  4  Cf.  Gen.  xli.  54.  B  Cf.  Gen.  xli.  56. 


192  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES    [chap,  xlii 

was  food  in  Egypt,  and  lie  sent  his  ten  sons  that  they 
should  procure  food  for  him  in  Egypt ;   but  Benjamin 
he  did  not  send,  and  (the  ten  sons  of  Jacob)  arrived 
(in  Egypt)  among  those  that  went  (there.)     5.  And 
Joseph  recognized  them,  but  they  did  not  recognize 
him,  and  he  spake  unto  them  and  questioned  them, 
and  he  said  unto  them :    "  Are  ye  not  spies,  and  have 
ye  not  come  to  explore  the  approaches  of  the  land  ?  ' 
And  he  put  them  in  ward.     6.  And  after  that  he  set 
them  free  again,  and  detained  Simeon  alone  and  sent 
off  his  nine  brothers.     7.  And  he  filled  their  sacks 
with  corn,  and  he  put  their  gold  in  their  sacks,  and 
they  did  not  know.     8.  And  he  commanded  them  to 
bring  their  younger  brother,  for  they  had  told  him 
their   father  was  living  and   their  younger  brother. 
9.  And  they  went  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt  and  they 
came  to  the  land  of  Canaan  ;    and  they   told   their 
father  all  that  had  befallen  them,  and  how  the  lord  of 
the  country  had  spoken  roughly  to  them,  and  had 
seized  Simeon  till  they  should  bring  Benjamin.     10. 
And    Jacob  said  :     "  Me   have   ye   bereaved   of   my 
children  !  Joseph  is  not  and  Simeon  also  is  not,  and 
ye   will    take    Benjamin    away.     On    me    hath  your 
wickedness  come."  x     11.  And  he  said  :  "  My  son  will 
not  go  down  with  you  lest  perchance  he  fall  sick ; 
for  their  mother  gave  birth  to  two  sons,  and  one  hath 
perished,  and  this  one  also  ye  will  take  from  me.     If 
perchance  he  took  a  fever  on  the  road,2  ye  would 
iDring  down  my  old  age  with  sorrow  unto  death."     12. 
For  he  saw  that  their  money  had  been  returned  to 
every,  man  in  his  sack,  and  for  this  reason  he  feared 
to  send  him.     13.  And  the  famine  increased  and  be- 
came sore  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  in  all  lands  save 
in  the  land  of  Egypt,  for  many  of  the  children  of  the 
Egyptians  had  stored  up  their  seed  for  food  from  the 
time  when  they  saw  Joseph  gathering  seed  together 

1  ?  An  interpretation  of  Gen.  xlii.  36  ("  All  these  things 
are  against  me  "). 

■  "  If  mischief  befall  him  by  the  way  in  the  which  ye  go  " 
(Gen.  xlii.  38). 


chap,  xlii]   THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES  193 

and  putting  it  in  storehouses  and  preserving  it  for  the 

years  of  famine.     14.  And  the  people  of  Egypt  fed 

themselves  thereon   during   the    first   year  of     their 

famine.     15.  But  when  Israel  saw  that  the  famine  was 

very  sore  in  the  land,  and  there  was  no  deliverance, 

he  said  unto  his  sons  :    "  Go  again,  and  procure  food 

for  us  that  we  die  not."     16.  And  they  said  :    "  We 

shall  not  go ;  unless  our  youngest  brother  go  with  us, 

we  shall  not  go."     17.  And  Israel  saw  that  if  he  did 

not  send  him  with  them,  they  should  all  perish  by 

reason    of    the    famine.     18.     And     Reuben    said  : 

"  Give  him  into  my  hand,  and  if  I  do  not  bring  him 

back  to  thee,  slay  my  two  sons  instead  of  his  soul." 

And  he  said  unto  him  :    "  Me  will  not  go  with  thee." 

19.  And  Judah  came  near  and  said  :   "  Send  him  with 

me,  and  if  I  do  not  bring  him  back  to  thee,  let  me 

bear  the  blame  before  thee  all  the  days  of  my  life."    20. 

And  he  sent  him  with  them  in  the  second  year  of  this  2172  a.m. 

week  on  the  first  day  of  the  month,  and  they  came  to 

the  land  of  Egypt  with  all  those  who  went,  and  (they 

had)  presents  in  their  hands,  stacte  and  almonds  and 

terebinth  nuts  and  pure  honey.     21.  And  they  went 

and  stood  before  Joseph,  and  he  saw  Benjamin  ltis 

brother,  and  he  knew  him,  and  said  unto  them  :    "  Is 

this  your  youngest  brother?  "     And  they  said  unto 

him  :    "  It  is  he."     And   he  said  :     "  The   Lord   be 

gracious  to  thee,  my  son  !  "     22.  And  he  sent  him 

into  his  house  and  he  brought   forth   Simeon   unto 

them  and  he  made  a  feast  for  them,  and  they  presented 

to  him  the  gift  which  they  had  brought  in  their  hands. 

23.  And  they  ate  before  him  and  he  gave  them  all  a 

portion,  but  the  portion  of  Benjamin  was  seven  times 

larger  than  that  of  any  of  theirs.     24.  And  they  ate 

and  drank  and  arose  and  remained  with  their  asses. 

25.  And  Joseph  devised  a  plan   whereby  he  might 

learn  their  thoughts  as  to  whether  thoughts  of  peace 

prevailed  amongst  them,  and  he  said  to  the  steward 

who  was  over  his  house  :    "  Fill  all  their  sacks  with 

food,  and  return  their  money  unto  them  into  their 

vessels,  and  my  cup,  the  silver  cup  out  of  which  I 

N 


194         ?HE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xlii 

drink,  put  it  in  the  sack  of  the  youngest,  and  send 
them  away."  1 

Joseph  finally  tests  his  Brethren,  and  then 
makes  himself  known  to  them  (xliii.  1-24; 
cf.  Gen.  xliv.,  xlv.). 

XLIII.  And  he  did  as  Joseph  had  told  him,  and 
filled  all  their  sacks  for  them  with  food  and  put  their 
money  in  their  sacks,  and  put  the  cup  in  Benjamin's 
sack.     2.  And  early  in  the  morning  they  departed, 
and  it  came  to  pass  that,  when  they  had  gone  from 
thence,  Joseph  said  unto  the  steward  of  his  house  : 
"  Pursue   them,  run    and   seize  them,  saying,   '  For 
good  ye  have  requited  me  with  evil ;  you  have  stolen 
from  me  the  silver  cup  out  of  which  my  lord  drinks.' 
And  bring  back  to  me  their  youngest  brother,  and 
fetch  (him)  quickly  before  I  go  forth  to  my  seat  of 
judgment."     3.  And  he  ran  after  them  and  said  unto 
them  according  to  these  words.     4.  And  they  said 
unto  him  :    "  God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should 
do  this  thing,  and  steal  from  the  house  of  thy  lord 
any  utensil,  and  the  money  also  which  we  found  in 
our  sacks  the  first  time,  we  thy  servants  brought 
back  from  the  land  of  Canaan.     5.  How  then  should 
we  steal  any  utensil  ?     Behold  here  are  we  and  our 
sacks;    search,  and  wherever  thou  findest  the  cup  in 
the  sack  of  any  man  amongst  us,  let  him  be  slain,  and 
we  and  our  asses  will  serve  thy  lord."     6.  And  he 
said  unto  them  :  4<  Not  so,  the  man  with  whom  I  find, 
him  only  shall  I  take  as  a  servant,  and  ye  will  return 
in  peace  unto  your  house."     7.  And  as  he  was  search- 
ing in  their  vessels,  beginning  with  the   eldest   and 
ending  with  the  youngest,  it  was  found  in  Benjamin's 
sack.     8.  And  they  rent  their  garments,  and  laded 
their  asses,  and  returned  to  the  city  and  came  to  the 
house  of  Joseph,  and  they  all  bowed  themselves  on 
their  faces  to  the  ground  before  him.     9.  And  Joseph 
said  unto  them  :    "  Ye  have  done  evil."     And  they 

1  Cf.  Gen   xliv.  1,  2. 


chap,  xliii]     THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES        195 

said  :  "  What  shall  we  say  and  how  shall  we  defend 
ourselves?  Our  lord  hath  discovered  the  transgres- 
sion of  his  servants ;  behold  we  are  the  servants  of 
our  lord,  and  our  asses  also."  10.  And  Joseph  said 
unto  them  :  "  I  too  fear  the  Lord  ;  as  for  you,  go  ye 
to  your  homes  and  let  your  brother  be  my  servant, 
for  ye  have  done  evil.  Know  ye  not  that  a  man 
delighteth  in  his  cup  as  1  with  this  cup?  *  And  yet 
ye  have  stolen  it  from  me."  11.  And  Judah  said  : 
"  O  my  lord,  let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee,  speak  a  word 
in  my  lord's  ear;  two  brothers  did  thy  servant's 
mother  bear  to  our  father;  one  went  away  and  was 
lost,  and  hath  not  been  found,  and  he  alone  is  left 
of  his  mother,  and  thy  servant  our  father  loveth  him, 
and  his  life  also  is  bound  up  with  the  life  of  this  (lad). 
12.  And  it  will  come  to  pass,  when  we  go  to  thy  ser- 
vant our  father,  and  the  lad  is  not  with  us,  that  he 
will  die,  and  we  shall  bring  down  our  father  with 
sorrow  unto  death.  13.  Now  rather  let  me,  thy 
servant,  abide  instead  of  the  boy  as  a  bondsman  unto 
my  lord,  and  let  the  lad  go  with  his  brethren,  for  I 
became  surety  for  him  at  the  hand  of  thy  servant  our 
father,  and  if  I  do  not  bring  him  back,  thy  servant 
will  bear  the  blame  to  our  father  for  ever."  14.  And 
Joseph  saw  that  they  were  all  accordant  in  good- 
ness one  with  another,  and  he  could  not  refrain  him- 
self, and  he  told  them  that  he  was  Joseph.  15.  And 
he  conversed  with  them  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  2  and 
fell  on  their  neck  and  wept.  But  they  knew  him  not 
and  they  began  to  weep.  16.  And  he  said  unto  them  : 
"  Weep  not  over  me,  but  hasten  and  bring  my  father 
to  me  ,  and  ye  see  that  it  is  my  mouth  that  speaketh 
and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin  see.  17.  Lor 
behold  this  is  the  second  year  of  the  famine,  and  there 
are  still  five  years  without  harvest  or  fruit  of  trees  or 
ploughing.  18.  Come  down  quickly  ye  and  your 
households,  so  that  ye  perish  not  through  the  famine, 

1  Gen.  x'iv.  15  ("  Know  yc  not  that  such  a  man  as  I  can 
indeed  divine  ?  ").     The  change  in  our  text  may  be  deliberate. 

2  A  Midrashic  touch;    so  liereshxth  rabba  xciii. 


196        THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  xliii 

and  do  not  be  grieved  for  your  possessions,  for  the  Lord 
sent  me  before  you  to  set  things  in  order  that  many 
people  might  live.  19.  And  tell  my  father  that  I  am 
still  alive,  and  ye,  behold,  ye  see  that  the  Lord  hath 
made  me  as  a  father  to  Pharaoh,  and  ruler  over  his 
house  and  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  20.  And  tell 
my  father  of  all  my  glory,  and  all  the  riches  and  glory 
that  the  Lord  hath  given  me."  21.  And  by.  the 
command  of  the  mouth  of  Pharaoh  he  gave  them 
chariots  and  provisions  for  the  way,  and  he  gave  them 
all  many-coloured  raiment  and  silver.  22.  And  to 
their  father  he  sent  raiment  and  silver  and  ten  asses 
which  carried  corn,  and  he  sent  them  away.  23.  And 
they  went  up  and  told  their  father  that  Joseph  was 
alive,  and  was  measuring  out  corn  to  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  and  that  he  was  ruler  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt.  24.  And  their  father  did  not  believe  it, 
for  he  was  beside  himself  in  his  mind ;  but  when  he 
saw  the  wagons  which  Joseph  had  sent,  the  life  of  his 
spirit  revived,  and  he  said  :  "  It  is  enough  for  me  if 
Joseph  live th ;  I  will  go  down  and  see  him  before  I 
die. 

Jacob  celebrates  the  Feast  of  First-fruits  and 
journeys  to  Egypt.    List  of  his  Descendants. 

(xliv.  1-34;   cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  1-28). 

XLIV.  And  Israel  took  his  journey  from  f  Haran  f  x 
from  his  house  on  the  new  moon  of  the  third  month, 
and  he  went  on  the  way  of  the  Well  of  the  Oath,2 
and  he  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac 
on  the  seventh  of  this  month.  2.  And  Jacob  re- 
membered the  dream  that  he  had  seen  at  Bethel,3 
and  he  feared  to  go  down  into  Egypt.  3.  And  while 
he  was  thinking  of  sending  word  to  Joseph  to  come 
to  him,  and  that  he  would  not  go  down,  he  remained 
there  seven  days,  if  perchance  he  should  see  a  vision 
as  to  whether  he  should  remain  or  go  down.     4.  And 

1  Probably  corrupt  for  "  Hebron  ";    cf.  Gen.  xxxvii.  14. 
18  Beersheba.  ■  Cf.  xxvii.  22. 


chap,  xliv]     THE    BOOK   OF   JUBILEES         197 

he  celebrated  the  harvest  festival  of  the  first-fruits  l 
with  old  grain,  for  in  all  the  land  of  Canaan  there  was 
not  a  handful  of  seed  (in  the  land),  for  the  famine 
was  over  all  the  beasts  and  cattle  and  birds,  and  also 
over  man.  5.  And  on  the  sixteenth  the  Lord  ap- 
peared unto  him,  and  said  unto  him,  "  Jacob,  Jacob  "  ; 
and  he  said,  "  Here  am  I."  And  He  said  unto  him  : 
"  I  am  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham 
and  Isaac ;  fear  not  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  for  I  will 
there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation.  6.  I  shall  go 
down  with  thee,  and  I  shall  bring  thee  up2  (again), 
and  in  this  land  wilt  thou  be  buried,  and  Joseph 
will  put  his  hands  upon  thy  eyes.  Fear  not  ;  go 
down  into  Egypt."  7.  And  his  sons  rose  up,  and 
his  sons'  sons,  and  they  placed  their  father  and  their 
possessions  upon  wagons.  8.  And  Israel  rose  up  from 
the  Well  of  the  Oath  on  the  sixteenth  of  this  third 
month,  and  he  went  to  the  land  of  Egypt.  9.  And 
Israel  sent  Judah  before  him  to  his  son  Joseph  to 
examine  3  the  Land  of  Goshen,  for  Joseph  had  told 
his  brothers  that  they  should  come  and  dwell  there 
that  they  might  be  near  him.  10.  And  this  was  the 
goodliest  (land)  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  near  to 
him,  for  all  (of  them)  and  also  for  the  cattle.  11.  And 
these  are  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  who  went 
into  Egypt  with  Jacob  their  father.  12. 4  Reuben, 
the  first-born  of  Israel ;  and  these  are  the  names  of 
his  sons  :  Enoch,  and  Pallu,  and  Hezron  and  Carmi 
— five.5  13.  Simeon  and  his  sons;  and  these  are 
the  names  of  his  sons  :  Jemuel,  and  Jamin,  and  Ohad, 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  1  (the  feast  was  celebrated  on  the  15th  of 
the  third  month). 

2  Cf.  xxvii.  24,  xxxii.  23. 

a  "  To  show  the  way  "  (Gen.  xlvi.  28). 

4  The  number  70,  according  to  our  text,  includes  Jacob 
with  his  descendants.  Another  reckoning  makes  up  the 
number  by  excluding  Jacob  himself:  cf.  Exod.'  i.  5  and 
Gen.  xlvi.  15,  18,  21 .  25,  27.  The  number  75,  in  Acts  vii.  14. 
is  due  to  the  J. XX  of  Exod.  i.  5  and  Dcut.  x.  22.  There 
are  certain  differences  in  detail  between  the  list  in  our  text 
and  the  details  given  in  Genesis;    see  Charles  ad  loc. 

6  The  father  is  included  in  each  case. 


198         THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap,  xliv 

and  Jachin,  and  Zohar,  and  Shaul,  the  son  of  the 
Zephathite  !  woman — seven.     14.  Levi  and  Ins  sons; 
and  these  are  the  names  of  his  sons  :    Gershon,  and 
Kohath,  and  Merari — four.     15.  Judah  and  his  sons  ; 
and  these  are  the  names  of  his  sons  :  Shela,  and  Perez, 
and  Zerah — four.     16.  Issachar  and  his  sons ;    and 
these,  are  the  names  of  his  sons  :    Tola,  and  Phua,2 
and   Jasub,8   and   Shimron — five.     17.  Zebulon   and 
his  sons  ;  and  these  are  the  names  of  his  sons  :   Sered, 
and    Elon,    and    Jahleel — four.     18.  And   these    are 
the  sons  of  Jacob,  and  their  sons,  whom  Leah  bore 
to  Jacob  in  Mesopotamia,  six,  and  their  one  sister, 
Dinah  :    and  all  the  souls  of  the  sons  of  Leah,  and 
their  sons,  who  went  with  Jacob  their  father  into 
Egypt,    were    twenty-nine,    and    Jacob   their   father 
being   with   them,    they   were    thirty.     19.  And   the 
sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid,  the  wife  of  Jacob, 
whom  she  bore  unto  Jacob,  Gad  and  Asher.     20.  And 
these  are  the  names  of  their  sons  who  went  with  him 
into  Egypt  :    the  sons  of  Gad  :    Ziphion,  and  Haggi, 
and  Shuni,  and  Ezbon,  (and  Eri)  and  Areli,  and  Arodi 
— eight.     21.  And  the  sons  of   Asher  :    Imnah,  and 
Ishvah,  (and  Ishvi),  and  Beriah,  and  Serah,  their  one 
sister — six.     22.  All  the  souls  were  fourteen,  and  all 
those  of   Leah   were   forty-four.     23.  And   the   sons 
of  Rachel,  the  wife  of  Jacob  :   Joseph  and  Benjamin. 
24.  And  there  were  born  to  Joseph  in  Egypt  before 
his  father  came  into  Egypt,  those  whom  Asenath, 
daughter  of  Potiphar  priest  of  Heliopolis  bare  unto 
him,  Manasseh,  and  Ephraim — three.     25.  And  the 
sons  of  Benjamin  :    Bela  and  Becher,  and  Ashbel, 
Gera,  and  Naaman,  and  Ehi,  and  Rosh,  and  Muppim, 
and  Huppim,  and  Ard — eleven.     26.  And  all  the  souls 
of  Rachel  were  fourteen.     27.  And  the  sons  of  Bilhah, 
the  handmaid  of  Rachel,  the  wife  of  Jacob,  whom  she 

1  i.e.  a  native  of  the  Canaanite  city  Zephath ;  cf.  Judg. 
i.  17. 

1  So  LXX,  Sam.  and  other  versions.  MT  Puvah  (Gen. 
xlvi.  13). 

1  So  Sam.  (Gen.  xlvi.  13)  and  LXX  =  MT  lob. 


chap,  xliv]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBlLEbb  199 

bare  to  Jacob,  were  Dan  and  Naphtali.  28.  And 
these  are  the  names  of  their  sons  who  went  with  them 
into  Egypt.  And  the  sons  of  Dan  were  Hushim,  and 
Samon,   and  Asudi,   and   'fjaka,   and   Salomon — six. 

29.  And  they  died  the  year  in  winch  they  entered 
into  Egypt,  and  there  was  left  to  Dan  Hushim  alone.1 

30.  And  these  are  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Naphtali  : 
Jahziel,  and  Guni,  and  Jezer,  and  Shallum,  and 
'Iv.2  31.  And  'Iv,  who  was  born  after  the  years 
of  famine,  died  in  Egypt.  32.  And  all  the  souls  of 
Rachel  were  twenty-six.  33.  And  all  the  souls  of 
Jacob  which  went  into  Egypt  were  seventy  souls. 
These  are  his  children  and  his  children's  chil- 
dren, in  all  seventy;  but  five  died  in  Egypt  before 
Joseph,  and  had  no  children.  34.  And  in  (he  land  of 
Canaan  two  sons  of  Judah  died,  Er  and  Onan,  and 
they  had  no  children,  and  the  children  of  Israel 
buried  those  who  perished,  and  they  were  reckoned 
among  the  seventy  Gentile  nations. 

Joseph  receives  Jacob.  The  Land  of  Egypt  is 
acquired  for  Pharaoh.  Jacob's  Death  and 
Burial  (xlv.  1-16  ;  cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  28 ff.,  xlvii.  n  ff.). 

XLV.  And  Israel  went  into  the  country  of  Egypt,  2172  a  m. 
into  the  land  of  Goshen,  on  the  new  moon  of  the 
fourth  month,  in  the  second  year  of  the  third  week 
of  the  forty-fifth  jubilee.  2.  And  Joseph  went  to 
meet  his  father  Jacob,  to  the  land  of  Goshen,  and  he 
fell  on  his  father's  neck  and  wept.  3.  And  Israel 
said  unto  Joseph  :  "  Now  let  me  die  since  I  have  seen 
thee,  and  now  may  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  be  blessed, 
the  God  of  Abraham  and  the  God  of  Isaac  who  hath 
not  withheld  His  mercy  and  His  grace  from  His 
servant  Jacob.  4.  It  is  enough  for  me  that  I  have 
seen  thy  face  whilst  ]l  amj  3  yet  alive;  yea,  true  is 
the  vision   which   I   saw  at   Bethel.     Blessed   be  the 

1  In  Gen    xlvi.  23  "  Hushim  "  (MT)  is  mentioned  alone. 

2  Cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  24  and  1  Chron.  vii.  13  :    'Iv  is  omitted  in 
both  texts. 

3  MT  (Gen.  xlvi.  30)  "  that  thou  art" 


200  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES   [chap,  xlv 

Lord  my  God  for  ever  and  ever,  and  blessed  be  His 
name."     5.  And  Joseph  and  his  brothers  ate  bread 
before    their    father    and    drank    wine,    and    Jacob 
rejoiced  with   exceeding  great   joy  because   he  saw 
Joseph  eating  with  his  brothers  and  drinking  before 
him,  and  he  blessed  the  Creator  of  all  things  who  had 
preserved  him,  and  had  preserved  for  him  his  twelve 
sons.     6.  *  And  Joseph  had  given  to  his  father  and 
to  his  brothers  as  a  gift  the  right  of  dwelling  in  the 
land  of  Goshen  and  in  Rameses  and  all  the  region 
round  about,  which  he  ruled  over  before   Pharaoh. 
And  Israel  and  his  sons  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Goshen, 
the  best  part  of  the  land  of  Egypt;    and  Israel  was 
one  hundred  and  thirty  years  old  when  he  came  into 
Egypt.     7.  And  Joseph  nourished  his  father  and  his 
brethren   and  also   their  possessions  with   bread  as 
much  as  sufficed  them  2  for  the  seven  years  of  the 
famine.     8.  And    the    land    of    Egypt    suffered    by 
reason  of  the  famine,  and  Joseph  acquired  all  the  land 
of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh  in  return  for  food,  and  he  got 
possession  of  the  people  and  their  cattle  and  every- 
thing for  Pharaoh.     9.  And  the  years  of  the  famine 
were  accomplished,  and  Joseph  gave  to  the  people 
in  the  land  seed  and  food  that  they  might  sow  (the 
land)  fn  the  eighth  year,  for  the  river  had  overflowed 
all  the  land  of  Egypt.     10.  For  in  the  seven  years 
of  the  famine  it  had  not  overflowed  and  had  irrigated 
only  a  few  places  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  but  now 
it  overflowed  and  the  Egyptians  sowed  the  land,  and 
it  bore  much  corn  that  year.     11.  And  this  was  the 
2178  a.m.  nrst  year  of  the  fourth  week  of  the  forty-fifth  jubilee. 
12.  And  Joseph  took  of  the  corn  of  the  harvest  the 
fifth  part  for  the  kirg  and  left  four  parts  for  them  for 
food  and  for  seed,  and  Joseph  made  it  an  ordinance 
for  the  land  of  Egypt  until  this  day.     13.  And  Israel 
lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen  years,  and  all 
the   days  which   he  lived  were   three  jubilees,   one 
hundred  and  forty-seven  years,  and  he  died  in  the 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xlvii.  11. 

a  MT  (Gen.  xlvii.  12)  "  according  to  their  families." 


chap,  xlv]    THE   HOOK   OF   JUBILEES  201 

fourth  year  of  the  fifth  week  of  the  forty-fifth  jubilee.  2188  a.m. 

14.  And  Israel  blessed  his  sons  before  he  died  and 
told  them  everything1  that  would  befall  them  in  the 
land  of  Egypt ;  and  he  made  known  to  them  what 
would  come  upon  them  in  the  last  days,  and  blessed 
them  and  gave  to  Joseph  two  portions  2  in  the  land. 

15.  And  he  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  he  was  buried 
in  the  double  cave  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  near  Abra- 
ham his  father  in  the  grave  which  he  dug  for  himself 
in  the  double  cave  in  the  land  of  Hebron.3  16.  And 
he  gave  all  his  books  and  the  books  of  his  fathers  to 
Levi  his  son  that  he  might  preserve  them  and  renew 
them  for  his  children  until  this  day.4 

The  Death  of  Joseph.  The  Bones  of  Jacob's 
Sons  (except  Joseph)  interred  at  Hebron. 
The  Oppression  of  Israel  by  Egypt  (xlvi. 
1-16;    cf.  Gen.  1.;    Exod.  i.). 

XLVI.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  after  Jacob  died 
the  children  of  Israel  multiplied  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  they  became  a  great  nation,  and  they  were  of 
one  accord  in  heart,  so  that  brother  loved  brother 
and  every  man  helped  his  brother,  and  they  increased 
abundantly  and  multiplied  exceedingly,  ten  weeks  2242  a.m 
of  years,  all  the  days  of  the  life  of  Joseph.5  2.  And 
there  was  no  Satan  6  nor  any  evil  all  the  days  of  the 
life  of  Joseph  which  he  lived  after  his  father  Jacob, 
for  all  the  Egyptians  honoured  the  children  of  Israel 
all  the  days  of  the  life  of  Joseph.  3.  And  Joseph 
died  being  a  hundred  and  ten  years  old  ;  7  seventeen 
years  he  lived  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  ten  years 
he  was  a  servant,  and  three  years  in  prison,  and 
eighty  years  he  was  under  the  king,  ruling  all  the  land 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xlix.  1  ff.  2  Cf.  Gen.  xlviii.  22. 

3  Cf.  Gen.  1.  13. 

4  Note  that  the  tribal  traditions  are  represented  by  our 
author  as  in  the  keeping  of  the  priests  (Levi  and  his 
descendants). 

6  Cf.  Exod.  i.  7.  •  Cf.  xxiii.  29. 

7  Cf.  Gen.  I.  22,  26;    Exod.  i.  6. 


202         THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES      [chap,  xlvi 

of  Egypt.  4.  And  he  died  and  all  his  brethren  and 
all  that  generation.  5.  And  he  commanded  the 
children  of  Israel  before  he  died  that  they  should 
carry  his  bones  with  them  when  they  went  forth  from 
the  land  of  Egypt.1  6.  And  he  made  them  swear 
regarding  his  bones,  for  he  knew  that  the  Egyptians 
would  not  again  bring  forth  and  bury  him  in  the  land 
of  Canaan,2  for  Makamar6n,3  king  of  Canaan,  while 
dwelling  in  the  land  of  Assyria,  fought  in  the"valley 
with  the  king  of  Egypt  and  slew  him  there,  and  pur- 
sued after  the  Egyptians  to  the  gates  of  '£rm6n.4 
7.  But  he  was  not  able  to  enter,  for  another,  a  new 
king,  had  become  king  of  Egypt,5  and  he  was  stronger 
than  he,  and  he  returned  to  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
the  gates  of  Egypt  were  closed,  and  none  went  out 
and   none  came   into   Egypt.     8.  And   Joseph  died 

2242  a.m.  m  the  forty-sixth  jubilee,  in  the  sixth  week,  in  the 
second  year,  and  they  buried  him  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  all  his  brethren  died  after  him.  9.  And 
the  king  of  Egypt  went  forth  to  war  with  the  king  of 

2263  a.m.  Canaan  in  the  forty-seventh  jubilee,  in  the  second 
week  in  the  second  year,  and  the  children  of  Israel 
brought  forth  all  the  bones  of  the  children  of  Jacob 
save  the  bones  of  Joseph,  and  they  buried  them  in  the 
field  in  the  double  cave  in  the  mountain."""  10.  And 
the"mbst  (of  them)  returned  tb~Egypt,  but  a  few  of 
them  remained  in   the  mountains  of  Hebron,   and 

1  Cf.  Gen.  1.  25. 

■  Cf.  Test.  Simeon  viii.  3  f.  ("  For  the  bones  of  Joseph  the 
Egyptians  guarded  in  the  tombs  of  the  kings.  For  the  sorcerers 
told  them  that  on  the  departure  of  the  bones  of  Joseph  there 
should  be  throughout  all  the  land  darkness  and  gloom,"  etc.). 

3  Identification  unknown. 

4  i.e.  Heroohpolis  (close  to  the  desert). 

6  ?  Rameses  III  (1202-1171),  founder  of  the  20th  dynasty, 
who  repulsed  an  invasion  of  peoples  from  the  north  and  twice 
marched  through  Canaan,  and  in  North  Canaan  defeated  the 
invaders.  The  war  between  Egypt  and  Canaan,  mentioned 
in  our  text,  is  referred  to  in  Test.  Simeon  viii.  2.  A  war 
between  Cush  and  Egypt,  in  which  Moses  led  the  Egyptians, 
is  referred  to  by  Josephus  {Ant.  ii.-io).  Jn  Chron.  Jerahmeel 
xlv.  it  is  between  Cush  and  Syria. 


chap,  xlvi]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES         203 

Amram  thy  father  remained  with  them1.  11.  And 
the  king  of  Canaan  was  victorious  over  the  king  of 
Egypt,  and  he  closed  the  gates  of  Egypt.  12.  And 
he  aevised  an  evil  device  against  the  children  of 
Israel  of  afflicting  them  ;  and  he  said  unto  the  people 
of  Egypt  :  13.  "  Behold  the  people  of  the  children 
of  Israel  have  increased  and  multiplied  more  than  we. 
Come  and  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them  before  they 
become  too  many,  and  let  us  afflict  them  with  slavery 
before  war  come  upon  us  and  before  they  too  fight 
against  us ;  else  they  will  join  themselves  unto  our 
enemies  and  get  them  up  out  of  our  land,  for  their 
hearts  and  faces  are  towards  the  land  of  Canaan." 
14.  And  he  set  over  them  taskmasters  to  afflict  them 
with  slavery;  and  they  built  strong2  cities  for 
^Pharaoh,  Pithom  and  Raamses,  and  they  built  all 
-the  walls  and  all  the  fortifications  which  had  fallen 
in  the  cities  of  Egypt.  15.  And  they  mado  them 
serve  with  rigour,  and  the  more  they  dealt  evilly 
with  them,  the  more  they  increased  and  multiplied. 
16.  And  the  people  of  Egypt  abominated  the  children 
of  Israel. 


The  Birth  and  Early  Years  oi  Moses 

(xlvii.  1-12 ;    cf.  Exod.  ii.). 

XLVII.  And  in  the  seventh  week,  in  the  seventh  2303  am 
year,  in  the  forty-seventh  jubilee,  thy  father  3  went 
forth  from  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  thou  wast  born 
in  the  fourth  week,  in  the  sixth  year  thereof,  in  the  2330 am 
forty-eighth  jubilee  ;  this  was  the  time  of  tribulation 
on  the  children  of  Israel.  2.  And  Pharaoh,  king  of 
Egypt,  issued  a  command  regarding  them  that  they 

1  This  interesting  statement  apparently  implies  that  some 
of  the  Hebrew  tribes  were  already  in  Canaan  before  the 
Exodus.  Or  is  it  a  reminiscence  of  the  fact  that  the  tribe 
of  Judah  absorbed  some  South  Canaanitish  tribes  which  were 

never  in  Egypt  ?     Cf.  Burncy  in  Journal  of  Theological  Studies, 

1908,  pp.  321-352. 

2  So  LXX  (Exod.  i.  11);    MT  =    ?  **  store  cities." 
*  i.  e.  Moses*  father,  Amram. 


204         THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES   [chap,  xlvii 

should  cast  all  their  male  children  which  were  born 
into  the  river.     3.   And  they  cast  them  in  for  seven 
months  until  the  day  that  thou  wast  born.     And  thy 
mother  hid   thee   tor   three   months,   and   they   told 
regarding  her.     4.  And  she  made  an  ark  for  thee,  and 
covered  it  with  pitch  and  asphalt,  and  placed  it  in 
the  flags  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  she  placed  thee 
in  it  seven  days,  and  thy  mother  came  by  night  and 
suckled  thee,  and  by  day  Miriam,  thy  sister,  guarded 
thee  from  the  birds.     5.   And  in  those  days  Tharmuth,1 
the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  came  to  bathe  in  the  river, 
and  she  heard   thv  voice  crying,  and  she  told  her 
maidens  to  bring  thee  forth,  and  they  brought  thee 
unto  her.     6.  And  she  took  thee  out  of  the  ark,  and 
she  had  compassion  on  thee.     7.  And  thy  sister  said 
unto  her  :    "  Sl^all  I  go  and  call  unto  thee  one  of  the 
Hebrew  women   to  nurse  and  suckle  this  babe  for 
thee?,"     And  she  said  (unto  her)  :    "  Go."     8.  And 
she  went- and  called  thy  mother  Jochebed,2  and  she 
gave  her  wages,  and  she  nursed  thee.     9.  And  after- 
wards, when  thou  wast  grown  up,  they  brought  thee 
unto  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  and  thou  didst  become 
her  son,  and  Amram  thy  father  taught  thee  writing,3 
and  after  thou   hadst  completed  three  weeks  they 
brought   thee  into   the   royal   court.     10.  And   thou 
2351-2372  wast  three  weeks  of  years  at  court  until  the  time 
a.m.      when  thou  didst  go  forth  from  the  royal  court  and 
didst  see  an  Egyptian  smiting  thy  friend  who  was  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  and  thou  didst  slay  him  and 
hide  him  in  the  sand.     11.  And  on  the  second  day 
thou  didst  find  two  of  the  children  of  Israel  striving 
together,  and  thou  didst  say  to  him  who  was  doing 
the  wrong  :    "  Why  dost  thou  smite  thy  brother?  ' 
12.  And   he   was   angry   and   indignant,    and   said  : 
"  Who  made  thee  a   prince  and  a  judge  over  us? 
Thinkest  thou  to  kill  me  as  thou  killedst  the  Egyptian 
yesterday  ?  "     And  thou  didst  fear  and  flee  on  account 
of  these  words. 

1  Thcrmuthis  (Josephus,  Ant.  ii.  9,  5,  7). 

a  Cf.  Exod.  vi.  20;  Num.xxvi.59.        3  Contrast  Acts  vii.  22. 


chap,  xlviii]   THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES        205 

From  the  Flight  of   Moses  to  the  Exodus 
(xlviii.  1-19;  cf.  Exod.  ii.  15  if.,  iv.  19-24,  vii.-xiv.). 

XLVIII.  And  in  the  sixtli  year  of  the  third  week  2372  AM. 
of  the  forty-ninth  jubilee  thou  didst  depart  and  dwell 
in  the  land  of  Midian  l  five  weeks  and  one  year. 
And  thou  didst  return  into  Egypt  2  in  the  second 
week  in  the  second  year  in  the  fiftieth  jubilee.  2.  2jioa.m. 
And  thou  thyself  knowest  what  He  spake  unto  thee 
on  Mount  Sinai,  and  what  prince  Mastema.  3  desired 
to  do  with  thee  when  thou  wast  returning  into  Egypt 
on  the  way  when  thou  didst  meet  him  at  the  lodging- 
place.  3.  Did  he  not  with  all  his  power  seek  to  slay 
thee  and  deliver  the  Egyptians  out  of  thy  hand  when 
he  saw  that  thou  wast  sent  to  execute  judgment 
and  vengeance  on  the  Egyptians  ?  4  4.  And  I  de- 
livered thee  out  of  his  hand,  and  thou  didst  perform 
the  signs  and  wonders  which  thou  wast  sent  to  per- 
form in  Egypt  against  Pharaoh,  and  against  all  his 
house,    and    against    his    servants    and    his    people.  , 

5.  And  the  Lord  executed  a  great  vengeance  on  them 
for  Israel's  sake,  and  smote  them  through  (the 
plagues  of)  blood  and  frogs,  lice  and  dog-flies,  and 
malignant  boils  breaking  forth  in  blains ;  and  their 
cattle  by  death;  and  by  hail-stones,  thereby  He 
destroyed  everything  that  grew  for  them  ;  and  by 
locusts  which  devoured  the  residue  which  had  been 
left  by  the  hail,  and  by  darkness ;  and  (by  the  death) 
of  the  first-born  of  men  and  animals,  and  on  all  their 
idols  the  Lord  took  vengeance  and  burned  them  with 
fire.6     6.  And  everything  was  sent  through  thy  hand, 

1  Cf.  Exod.  ii.  15.  *  Cf.  Exod.  iv.  19. 

s  Notice  here  the  substitution  of  Satanic  agency  where 
the  original  text  of  Scripture  ascribes  the  action  directly 
to  Jahvch  (cf.  Exod.  iv.  24);  another  instance  in  our  ISook 
is  xvii.  16.  The  same  tendency  can  be  illustrated  from 
I  Chron.  xxi.  1  compared  with  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1. 

4  This  explanation  of  the  incident  described  in  Exod.  iv. 
24  ff.  seems  to  be  peculiar  to  mir  author,  the  real  explanation 
being  that  Moses  had  failed  to  circumcise  his  son  (so  Targ. 
Ps.-Jon.  in  Ice). 

r'  An  enumeration  of  the  ten  plagues. 


2o6     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES     [chap  .xLvin 

that  thou  shouldst  declare  (these  things)  before  they 
were  done,  and  thou  didst  speak  with  the  king  of 
Egypt  before  all  his  servants  and  before  his  people. 
7.  And  everything  took  place  according  to  thy  words  ; 
ten  great  and  terrible  judgments  came  on  the  land  of 
Egypt  that  thou  mightest  execute  vengeance  on  it 
for  Israel.  8.  And  the  Lord  did  everything  for 
Israel's  sake,  and  according  to  His  covenant,  which 
He  had  ordained  with  Abraham  that  He  would  take 
vengeance  on  them  as  they  had  brought  them  by 
force  into  bondage.1  9.  And  the  prince  of  the 
Mastema  stood  up  against  thee,  and  sought  to  cast 
thee  into  the  hands  of  Pharaoh,  and  he  helped  the 
Egyptian  sorcerers,  and  they  stood  up  and  wrought 
before  thee.  10.  The  evils  indeed  we  permitted  them 
to  work,  but  the  remedies  we  did  not  allow  to  be 
wrought  by  their  hands.  11.  And  the  Lord  smote 
them  with  malignant  ulcers,  arid  they  were  not  able 
to  stand,2  for  we  destroyed  them  so  that  they  could 
not  perform  a  single  sign.  12.  And  notwithstanding 
all  (these)  signs  and  wonders  the  prince  of  the  Mas- 
tema. was  not  put  to  shame  because  he  took  courage 
and  cried  to  the  Egyptians  to  pursue  after  thee  with 
all  the  powers  of  the  Egyptians,  with  their  chariots, 
and  with  their  horses,  and  with  all  the  hosts  of  the 
peoples  of  Egypt.3  13.  And  I  stood  between  the 
Egyptians  and  Israel,  and  we  delivered  Israel  out  of 
his  hand,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  his  people,  and  the 
Lord  brought  them  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  as 
if  it  were  dry  land.  14.  And  all  the  peoples  whom  he 
brought  to  pursue  after  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God 
cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  into  the  depths 
of  the  abyss  beneath  the  children  of  Israel,  even  as 
the  people  of  Egypt  had  cast  their  cluldren  into  the 
river.4  He  took  vengeance  on  1,000,000  of  them, 
and  one  thousand  strong  and  energetic  men   were 

1  Cf.  Gen.  xv.  13, 14.     *  Cf.Exod.  ix.  11.     a  Cf.  Ex.  xiv.  8  ,9. 

*  Another  example  of  the  lex  talionis  (cf.  iv  31),  though  a 
distinction  may  be  drawn  between  '  eye  for  eye  '  (a  principle 
of  human  justice)  and  '  measure  for  measure '  (a  theory  of 
divine  retribution) ;  cf.  Abrahams,  Studies  in  Pharisaism  and 
the  Gospels,  p.  154  (series  i). 


Chap,  xlviii     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES       207 

destroyed  on  account  of  one  suckling  of  the  children 
of  thy  people  which  they  had  thrown  into  the  river.1 
15.  And  on  the  fourteenth  day  and  on  the  fifteenth 
and  on  the  sixteenth  and  on  the  seventeenth  and  on 
the  eighteenth  the  prince  of  the  Mastema.  was  bound 
and  imprisoned  behind  the  children  of  Israel  that  he 
might  not  accuse  them.  16.  And  on  the  nineteenth 
we  let  them  loose  that  they  might  help  the  Egyptians 
and  pursue  the  children  of  Israel.  17.  And  he  2 
hardened  their  hearts  and  made  them  stubborn,  and 
the  device  was  devised  by  the  Lord  our  God  that  He 
might  smite  the  Egyptians  and  cast  them  into  the 
sea.  18.  And  on  the  fourteenth  we  bound  him  that 
he  might  not  accuse  the  children  of  Israel  on  the  clay 
when  they  asked  the  Egyptians  for  vessels  and 
garments,  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold,  and 
vessels  of  bronze,  in  order  to  despoil  the  Egyptians  3 
in  return  for  the  bondage  in  which  they  had  forced 
them  to  serve.  19.  And  we  did  not  lead  forth  the 
children  of  Israel  from  Egypt  empty  handed. 

Regulations  regarding  the  Passover  (xlix. 
1—23  ;  cf.  Exod.  xii.). 

XLIX.  Remember  the  commandment  which  the 
Lord  commanded  thee  concerning  the  passover,  that 
thou  shouldst  celebrate  it  in  its  season  on  the  four- 
teenth of  the  first  month,  that  thou  shouldst  kill  it 
before  it  is  evening,  and  that  they  should  eat  it  by 
night  on  the  evening4  of  the  fifteenth  from  the  time 
of  the  setting  of  the  sun.  2.  For  on  this  night — the 
beginning  of  the  festival  and  the  beginning  of  the  joy 
— ye  were  eating  the  passover  in  Egypt,  when  all 
the  powers  of  Mastema  5  had  been  let  loose  to  slay 
all  the  first-born  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  first- 
born  of    Pharaoh    to   the    first-born    of    the   captive 

1  Cf.  Wisdom  xviii.  5. 

2  i.  e.  the  prince  of  the  Mastfma  (substituted  for  Jahveh 
in  Exod.  xiv.  8). 

3  Cf.  Exod.  xii    35  f.  4  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  6. 

5   In  Exod.  xii.  29  it  is  Jahveh  Himself  who  smites  all  the 
first-born. 


208         THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES    [chap.xliX 

maidservant  in  the  mill,  and  to  the  cattle.     3.  And 
this  is  the  sign  which  the  Lord  gave  them  :  Into  every 
house  on  the  lintels  of  which  they  saw  the  blood  of  a 
lamb  of  the  first  year,  into  (that)  house  they  should 
not  enter  to  slay,  but  should  pass  by  (it),  that  all 
those  should.be  saved  that  were  in  the  house  because 
the  sign  of  the  blood  was  on  its  lintels.     4.  And  the 
powers  of  the  Lord  did  everything  according  as  the 
Lord  commanded  them,  and  they  passed  by  all  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  the  plague  came  not  upon 
them  to  destroy  from  amongst  them  any  soul  either 
of  cattle,  or  man,  or  dog.     5.  And  the  plague  was 
very  grievous  in  Egypt,  and  there  was  no  house  in 
Egypt  where  there  was  not  one  dead,  and  weeping 
and  lamentation.     6.  And  all  Israel  was  eating  the 
flesh  of  the  paschal  lamb,  and  drinking  the  wine,1 
and  was  lauding  and  blessing,  and  giving  thanks  to 
the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  and  was  ready  to  go 
forth  from  under  the  yoke  of  Egypt,  and  from  the 
evil  bondage.     7.  And  remember  thou  this  day  all 
the  days  of  thy  life,  and  observe  it  from  year  to  year 
all  the  days  of  thy  life,  once  a  year,  on  its  day,  accord- 
ing to  all  the  law  thereof,  and  do  not  adjourn  (it) 
from  day  to  day,  or  from  month  to  month.     8.  For 
it   is   an   eternal   ordinance,   and   engraven   on   the 
heavenly  tables  regarding  all  the  children  of  Israel 
that  they  should  observe  it  every  year  on  its  day 
once  a  year,  throughout  all  their  generations ; 2   and 
there  is  no  limit  of  days,  for  this  is  ordained  for  ever. 
9.  And  the  man  who  is  free  from  uncleanness,  and 
doth  not  come  to  observe  it  on  occasion  of  its  day, 
so  as  to  bring  an  acceptable  offering  before  the  Lord, 
and  to  eat  and  to  drink  before  the  Lord  on  the  day 
of  its  festival,  that  man  who  is  clean  and  close  at 
hand  will  be  cut  off ;    because  he  offered  not  the 
oblation  of  the  Lord  in  its  appointed  season,  he  will 

1  The  use  of  wine  at  the  Passover  feast  is  attested  here 
for  the  first  time.  For  the  later  prescriptions  about  the 
four  cups  of  wine  drunk  at  the  feast  see  Mishna,  Pesahim  x. 

1  For  7-8  cf.  vi.  20,  22. 


chap,  xltx]     THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES         209 

take  the  guilt  upon  himself.1  10.  Let  the  children 
of  Israel  come  and  observe  the  passover  on  the  day 
of  its  fixed  time,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first 
month,  between  the  evenings,  from  the  third  part 
of  the  day  to  the  third  part  of  the  night,  for  two 
portions  of  the  day  are  given  to  the  light,  and  a  third 
part  to  the  evening.2  11.  That  is  that  which  the 
Lord  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldst  observe 
it  between  the  evenings.  12.  And  it  is  not  permissible 
to  slay  it  during  any  period  of  the  light,  but  during 
the  period  bordering  on  the  evening,3  and  let  them 
eat  it  at  the  time  of  the  evening  until  the  third  part 
of  the  night,4  and  whatever  is  left  over  of  all  its  flesh 
from  the  third  part  of  the  night  and  onwards,  let 
them  burn  it  with  fire.  13.  And  they  shall  not  cook 
it  with  water,  nor  shall  they  eat  it  raw,  but  roast  on 
the  fire  :  5  they  shall  eat  it  with  diligence,0  its  head 
with  the  inwards  thereof 7  and  its  feet  they  shall 
roast  with  fire,  and  not  break  any  bone  thereof;8 
for  fof  the  children  of  Israel  no  bone  shall  be  crushed  j .• 
14.  Eor  this  reason  the  Lord  commanded  the  children 
of  Israel  to  observe  the  passover  on  the  day  of  its 
fixed  time,  and  they  shall  not  break  a  bone  thereof; 
for  it  is  a  festival  day,  and  a  day  commanded,  and 

1  Cf.  Num.  ix.  13. 

*  The  Jews  divided  the  night  into  three  parts,  or  watches 
(6-10  p.m.,  10  p.m.-2  a.m.,  2-6  a.m.).  The  corresponding 
parts  of  the  day  would  be  6-10  a.m.,  10  a.m.-2  p.m.,  and 
2  p.m.-6  p.m.  Our  text  says  the  last  of  these  was  "  given  " 
to  the  evening. 

*  This  is  an  interpretation  of  the  Biblical  phrase  "between 
the  two  evenings  "  (Exod.  xii.  6;  cf.  R.V.  marg).  This 
was  interpreted  by  the  Sadducecs  and  Samaritans  to  mean 
between  sunset  and  complete  darkness  (and  may  possibly 
have  that  meaning  here),  but  by  the  Pharisees  it  was  under- 
stood to  refer  to  the  earlier  afternoon  (3-6). 

4  t.  e.  any  time  between  6  p.m.  and  6  a.m.  The  Rabbis 
limited  the  eating  to  midnight. 

6  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  9. 

8  Cf.  LXX  (fTTrou5ai'a>j)  :    Heb.  (Exod.  xii.  11),."  in  haste." 

7  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  9.  "  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  46. 

*  The  Latin,  which  is  to  be  preferred,  reads  :  "  There  shall 
be  no  tribulation  among  the  sons  of  Israel  on  this  day." 

O 


2io  THE   BOOK   OF   JUBILEES   [chap.  XLIX 

there  may  be  no  passing  over  from  clay  to  day,  and 
month  to  month,  but  on  the  day  of  its  festival  let  it 
be  observed.  15.  And  do  thou  command  the 
children  of  Israel  to  observe  the  passover  throughout 
their  days,  every  year,  once  a  year  on  the  day  of  its 
fixed  time, .  and  it  will  come  for  a  memorial  well 
pleasing  before  the  Lord,  and  no  plague  will  come 
upon  them  to' slay  or  to  smite  l  in  that  year  in  which 
they  celebrate  the  passover  in  its  season  in  every 
respect  according  to  His  command.  16.  And  they 
shall  not  eat  it  outside  the  sanctuary  2  of  the  Lord, 
but  before  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
people  of  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  celebrate 
it  in  its  appointed  season.  17.  And  every  man  who 
hath  come  upon  its  day  shall  eat  it  in  the  sanctuary 
of  your  God  before  the  Lord  from  twenty  years  old  3 
and  upward  ;  for  thus  is  it  written  and  ordained  that 
they  should  eat  it  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord. 
18.  And  when  the  children  of  Israel  come  into  the 
land  which  they  are  to  possess,  into  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  set  up  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  in  the 
midst  of  the  land  in  one  of  their  tribes  until  the 
sanctuary  of  the  Lord  hath  been  built  in  the  land, 
let  them  come  and  celebrate  the  passover  in  the 
midst  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  let  them 
slay  it  before  the  Lord  from  year  to  year.  19.  And 
in  the  days  when  the  house  hath  been  built  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  their  inheritance,  they 
shall  go  there  and  slay  the  passover  in  the  evening, 
at  sunset,  at  the  third  part  of  the  day.  20.  And 
they  will  offer  its  blood  on  the  threshold  of  the  altar, 
and  shall  place  its  fat  on  the  fire  which  is  upon  the 
altar,  and  they  shall  eat  its  flesh  roasted  with  fire  in 
the  court  of  the  house  4  which  hath  been  sanctified  in 

1  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  13.  a  Cf.  20  below. 

3  i.e.  the  age  when  maturity  is  first  attained;  cf.  Exod. 
xxx.  14 ;    Num.  i.  32. 

4  Cf.  Deut.  xvi.  7.  In  later  times  the  Passover  lamb  was 
slaughtered,  in  the  Temple,  but  eaten  at  home,  i.  e.  in  a 
house  in  Jerusalem.  The  vast  numbers  of  pilgrims  present 
necessitated  this  extension  (cf.  Joseph  us,  War,  vi.  9, 3,  ii.  14,3). 


chap,  xlix]   THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  211 

the  name  of  the  Lord.  21.  And  they  may  not 
celebrate  the  passover  in  their  cities,1  nor  in  any  place 
save  before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  or  before  His 
house  where  His  name  hath  dwelt ;  and  they  will  not 
go  astray  from  the  Lord.  22.  And  do  thou,  Moses, 
command  the  children  of  Israel  to  observe  the 
ordinances  of  the  passover,  as  it  was  commanded 
unto  thee ;  declare  thou  unto  them  every  year  |and 
the  day  of  its  days,  andj  2  the  festival  of  unleavened 
bread,  that  they  should  eat  unleavened  bread  seven 
days,  (and)  that  they  should  observe  its  festival, 
and  that  they  bring  an  oblation  every  day  during 
those  seven  days  of  joy  before  the  Lord  on  the  altar 
of  your  God.  23.  For  ye  celebrated  this  festival 
with  haste  3  when  ye  went  forth  from  Egypt  till  ye 
entered  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur  ;  4  for  on  the  shore 
of  the  sea  ye  completed  it. 

Laws  regarding  the  Jubilees  and  the  Sabbath  1 

(1-  I-I3). 

L.  And  after  this  law  I  made  known  to  thee  the 
days  of  the  Sabbaths  in  the  desert  of  Sinfai],  which 
is  between  Elim  and  Sinai.5  2.  And  I  told  thee  of 
the  Sabbaths  of  the  land  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  1  told 
thee  of  the  jubilee  years  6  in  the  sabbaths  of  years  : 
but  the  year  thereof  have  I  not  told  thee  till  ye  enter 
the  land  winch  ye  are  to  possess.  3.  And  the  land 
also  will  keep  its  sabbaths  while  they  dwell  upon  it,7 
and  they  will  know  the  jubilee  year.  4.  Wherefore 
I  have  ordained  for  thee  the  year-weeks8  and  the 
years  and  the  jubilees  :  there  are  forty-nine  jubilees 
.from  the  days  of  Adam  until  this  day,  and  one  week  2410  a.m. 
and  two  years  :  and  there  are  yet  forty  yoars  to  come 
(lit.   "distant")   for  learning  the  commandments  of  2450  a.m. 

1  Cf.  Dent.  xvi.  5. 

2  Read  with  the  Latin  "  during  its  days  and  during." 

3  Cf.  Exod.  xii.  11.  *  Cf.  Exod.  xv.  22. 

5  Cf.   Exod.  xvi.   1    ("  the  wilderness  of  Sin   .   .   .  between 
Elim  and  Sinai  ").  e  Cf.  Lev.  xxv.  8. 

7  Cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  34.  8  A  "  year-week  "  =  seven  years. 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  JUBILEES    [chap,  l 

the  Lord,  until  they  pass  over  into  the  land  of  Canaan, 
crossing  the  Jordan  to  the  west.  5.  And  the  jubilees 
will  pass  by,  until  Israel  is  cleansed  from  all  guilt  of 
fornication,  and  uncleanness,  and  pollution,  and  sin, 
and  error,  and  dwelleth  with  confidence  in  all  the  land, 
and  there  will  be  no  more  a  Satan  or  any  evil 
one,  and  the  land  will  be  clean  from  that  time  for 
evermore.1 

6.  And   behold   the  commandment   regarding  the 
Sabbaths — I  have  written   (them)  down  for  thee — 
and  all  the  judgments  of  its  laws.     7.  Six  days  wilt 
thou  labour,  but  on  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath 
of  the  Lord  your  God.2     In  it  ye  shall  do  no  manner 
of  work,  ye  and  your  sons,  and  your  men-servants 
and  your  maid-servants,  and  all  your  cattle  and  the 
sojourner  also  who  is  with  you.     8.  And  the  man  that 
doeth  any  work  on  it  shall  die  •  3  whoever  desecrateth 
that  day,  whoever  lieth  with  (his)  wife,4  or  whoever 
saith  he  will  do  something  on  it,  that  he  will  set  out 
on  a  journey  thereon  5  in  regard  to  any  buying  or 
selling  : 6  and  whoever  draweth  water  thereon  7  which 
he  had  not  prepared  for  himself  on  the  sixth  day, 
and  whoever  taketh  up  any  burden  to  carry  it  out  of 
his  tent 8  or  out  of  his  house  shall  die.     9.  Ye  shall 
do  no  work  whatever  on  the  Sabbath  day  save  that 
•  ye  have  prepared  for  yourselves  on  the  sixth  day,  so 
as  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  rest,  and  keep  Sabbath  from 
all  work  on  that  day,  and  to  bless  the  Lord  your  God, 
who  has  given  you  a  day  of  festival,  and  a  holy  day  : 
and  a  day  of  the  holy  kingdom  for  all  Israel  is  this 
day  among  their  days  for  ever.     10.  For  great  is  the 

1  The  Messianic  Age  is  referred  to;    cf.  1.  29,  xxiii.  26  ff. 

*  Cf.  Exod.  xx.  9-10.  3  Cf.  Exod.  xxxv.  2. 

4  This  ascetic  practice  is  still  followed  by  the  Samaritans, 
but  not  by  the  Jews.  The  exact  opposite  is  enjoined  in  the 
Mishna;    see  Charles  ad  loo. 

*  Cf.  Exod.  xvi.  29.  It  was  allowed  to  go  a  distance  of 
2000  cubits  by  Rabbinical  law;  cf.  the  "Sabbath  day's 
journey  "  of  Acts  i.  12. 

*  Prohibited  by  Nehemiah  (cf.  Neh.  x.  31,  xiii.  16,  17). 

7  This  is  prohibited  by  the  Karaite  Jews.  8  Cf.  ii.  29. 


chap,  l]      THE   BOOK   OF  JUBILEES  213 

honour  which  the  Lord  hath  given  to  Israel  that  they 
should  eat  and  drink  and  be  satisfied  on  this  festival 
clay,  and  rest  thereon  from  all  labour  *  which  belongeth 
to  the  labour  of  the  children  of  men,  save  burning 
frankincense  and  bringing  oblations  and  sacrifices 
before  the  Lord  for  days  and  for  Sabbaths.  II.  This 
work  alone  shall  be  done  on  the  Sabbath-days  2  in 
the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  your  God ;  that  they  may 
atone  for  Israel  with  sacrifice  continually  from  day 
to  day  for  a  memorial  well-pleasing  before  the  Lord, 
and  that  He  may  receive  them  always  from  day  to 
day  according  as  thou  hast  been  commanded.  12. 
And  every  man  who  doeth  any  work  thereon,  or  goeth 
a  journey,  or  tilleth  (his)  farm,3  whether  in  his  house 
or  any  other  place,4  and  whoever  lighteth  a  fire,6  or 
rideth  on  any  beast,6  or  travelleth  by  ship  on  the  sea, 
and  whoever  striketh  or  killeth  anything,  or  slaughter- 
ed 7  a  beast  or  a  bird,  or  whoever  catcheth  an  animal 
or  a  bird  or  a  fish,  or  whoever  fastcth  or  maketh  war 
on  the  Sabbaths  :  8  13.  The  man  who  doetli  any  of 
these  things  on  the  Sabbath  shall  die,  so  that  the 
children  of  Israel  shall  observe  the  Sabbaths  accord- 
ing to  the  commandments  regarding  the  Sabbaths  of 
the  land,  as  it  is  written  in  the  tables,  which  He  gave 
into  my  hands  that  I  should  write  out  for  thee  t lie 
laws  of  the  seasons,  and  the  seasons  according  to 
the  division  of  their  days. 

Herewith  is  completed  the  account  of  the  division 
of  the  days. 

1  Cf.  ii.  21. 

*  Cf.  Matt.  xii.  5  (Num.  xxviii.  9,  10). 

3  Forbidden;    cf.   Fxod.  xxxiv.  21   (Mishna,  Shabb.  vii.  2). 

4  Perhaps  this  clause  should  follow  "  any  work  thereon  " 
(Charles). 

6  Forbidden;    Exod.  xxxv.  3;    cf.  Num.  xv.  32  f. 
9  Forbidden  by  the  Jewish  oral  law. 

7  "  Slaughtering  "  on  the  Sabbath  is  forbidden  in  the 
Mishna  (Shahb.  vii.  2). 

8  This  rule  was  at  first  rigidly  observed  in  the  Maccabcan 
wars  (cf.  1  Mace.  ii.  31—38),  but  afterwards  relaxed  (cf. 
1  Mace.  ii.  41). 


INDEX 


Names  and  Subjects. 


Abel,  iv.  i 

Abimelcch,  xxiv.  13,  17,  26 
Abraham,  see  Abram. 
'Abram,       father-in-law       of 

Terah,  xi.   14 
Abram,  birth  of,  xi.  15 
invents        an        improved 

plough,  xi.   23  f. 
observes  the  sky,  xii.   16- 

called  Abraham,  xv.  7 
his  ten  trials,  xvii.  17  note 
blesses  Jacob,  xxii.    10  fi.; 

28  f. ;  cf.  xix.   17  ft. 
death  of,  xxiii.  1  ;   see  fur- 
.  thcr      "  Beloved  "       and 
"  Friend  of  God  " 
Abraham's  tower  (at  Hebron) 
xxix.     16;      xxxi.     5  f. ; 
xxxiii.    21  ;     xxxvi.     12 ; 
xxxvii.  14 
Abraham's   bosom,  xxii.    25; 

xxiii.  2 
Abrek   (Gen.  xli.  43),  p.   187 

note 
Abysses,  the,  ii.  2,  16;    v.  29 
Adam,  creation  of,  ii.  14 
brought  into  Hdcn  40  days 
after  his  creation,  iii.  0 
names  the  animals,  iii.  1-3 
death  of,  iv.  20 
Adam       Admah,  xiii.   23 
'Adatan6ses,  vii.  15,  17 
'Adoran,  xxxviii.  3 
'Adfiram,     friend     of     Ksau, 

xxxvii.  9 
'Adurfim      (place-name), 
xxxviii.  8,  9 


'Afexag,  viii.  27 

'Afra\,  viii.  15 

Ahuzzath,  xxiv.  26 

Ai,  xiii.  5 

Akrabbim,  xxix.   14 

All  (God  of),  phrase,  xxii.  10, 

27;    xxx.    19;    cf.  xxxi. 

13,  29,  32 
'Amana,  viii.  21  ;    ix.  4 
Ammonites,  Xxix.  10;  xxxvii. 

6,  10  ;    xxxviii.  6 
Amorites,  xiv.   18;    cf.  xxix. 

0-1 1 
war  of,  against  Jacob  and 

his  sons,  xxxiv.  i-q 
Amram,  father  of  Moses,  xlvi. 

10 
Amraphel,  xiii.  22 
Aner,  xiii.  29 

Angelology  of  Jubilees,  xxiii. f. 
Angels,   created   on   the   first 

day,  ii.  2  and  notes. 
of  the  presence,  i.   27,   20 ; 

ii.  1,  2,  18  ;   xv.  27  ;  xxxi. 

M 
of  sanctification,  ii.  2,   18; 

xv.  27;     xxxi.    14 
over    natural    phenomena, 

ii.  2  note 
two    chief    orders    created 

circumcised,  xv.  27 
descend  in  days  of  Jared  to 

instruct  mankind,  iv.  15 
marry   daughters   of    men, 

v.  1  ;  vii.  21 
their  punishment,  and  their 

children,  v.  6-1 1  ;  vii  25 
guardian,  xxxv.  17 

215 


2l6 


INDEX 


Apocalypse  of  Abraham  (Sla- 
vonic),   referred    to,   pp. 

86,  88,  89,  178 
Apocalyptic    passage      xxiii. 

1 1-21 
Arabs,  xx.  13 
Aram,  son  of  Shem,  vii.  18; 

ix.  5 
land  of,  xxxvii.  6,  9 
Ararat,  v.  28 ;  viii.  21 ;  ix.  5  ; 

x.   15 
Ard,  xliv.  25 
Areli,  xliv.  20 
Arioch,  xiii.  22 
Arpachsad,  vii.  18;    viii.  1 
Asenath,  xxxiv.  20;    xl.  10; 

xliv.  24 
Ashbel,  xliv.  25 
Asher,  xxviii.  21 
Ashtaroth,  xxix.   10 
Asshur,  son  of  Shem,  vii.  18; 

ix.  3,  6 
land   of  (=  Assyria),    viii. 

21  ;  ix.  3,  5 
Astidt,  xliv.  28 
Atonement,    Day   of,    v.    17- 

18;    xxxiv.   18-19 
'Awan,  wife  of  Cain,  iv.  1,  9 
'Azura,  wife  of  Seth,   iv.    8, 

11;    wife  of  Heber,  viii. 

11 

Babel,  tower  of,  x.  19-26 

Babel,  viii.  21 

Babylon,  xx.  12 

Baraka,  wife  of  Jared,  iv.  16 

Baraki'el,  brother  of  Kenan, 
iv.  15 

Baraki'il,  brother  of  Methu- 
selah, iv.  28 

Bashai\,  viii.  21 

Bealoth,  xiii.' 10 

Becher,  xliv.  25 

Beersheba,    see    Well    of   the 
Oath 

Bela,  xliv.  25 

Beliar,  sons  of,  xv.  33 
spirit  of,  i.  20  and  note 

Beloved,   the    (=  Abraham), 
xxxi,  15,  20 


Benjamin,  xxxii.  3,  33 

Boon,  xxix.  10 

Beriah,  xiiv.  21 

Bet€nos,  wife  of  Lamech,  iv. 

28 
Bethel,  xiii.  5;   xxvii.  19,  26; 

xxxi.  3;    xxxii. 
B6thhor6n,  xxxiv.  4 
Bethshan,  xxix.  14 
Bethuel,  xix.   10;    xxvii,   10, 

12 
Bilhah,  sister  of  ZUpah, xxviii. 

9 

Reuben's  sin  with,  xxxiii. 

i-9 

Blood,  eating  of  forbidden, 
vii.  28,  29;    xxi.  6,  18 

Book  of  life,  xxx.  22  and  note ; 
xxxvi.   10 

Burial   of    patriarchs  in  Ca- 
naan, xlvi.  9 
lack  of,  a  misfortune,  xxiii. 

23 

Cain,  iv.  1 

death  of,  iv.  31 

Calendar,  reformation  of  the 
Jewish,  a  dominant  in- 
terest in  Jubilees,  xvi.  ff. 

Canaan,    vii.    10-13;     ix.    1; 
xxii.  21 
seizes  Palestine,  x.  29-34 

Canaanites,  xiv.  18;    xxx.  25 

Canaanitish  wives  of  Joseph, 
Judah,  Simeon,  xl.  10; 
xxxiv.  20 

Caphtorim,  xxiv.  30 

Carmi,  xliv.  12 

Chaldees,  land  of  the,  ix.  4,  5 

Chedorlaomer,  xiii.  22 

Circumcision,  an  everlasting 
ordinance,  xv.  14,  25; 
xx.  3 
observed  in  the  creation  of 
the  two  highest  orders  of 
angels,  xv.  27 
on  the  eighth  day,  xv.  14, 

25 
neglect  of    by   Israel,    xv. 

33-34 


INDEX 


217 


Covenant  with  Noah,  vi.  17- 

18 
with  Abram,  xiv.  20 
Cush,  vii.  13  ;   ix.  1 
Creation,  the  new,  i.  29;    iv. 

26;    xxiii.  26-30 ;    1.  5 
the   twenty-two   works  of, 

ii.   1-16 
Creator  of  all  things,  xvii.  3  ; 

xxii.  4,  27 ;    xlv.  5 

Dan,  xiii.  23;  xxviii.  18; 
xliv.  27-28 

Danel,  iv.  20 

Deborah,  xxxii.  30 

Decreasing  years  of  mankind, 
xxiii.  9  fT. 

Demonology  of  Jubilees,  p. 
xxiv 

Demons,  sons  of  the  Watch- 
ers, vii.  22,  27 
tempt  Noah's  sons,  x.  1-2, 

5,  8 ;    xii.  20 
one  tenth  of  the,  left  sub- 
ject to  Mastema,  x.  0 
to  be  punished  finally  with 

Satan,  x.  8 
worshipped,  xxii.  17 

Dinah,  daughter  of  Jacob, 
xxviii.  23;  xxx.  1-3; 
xxxiv.  15  ;    xliv.  18 

Dinah,  wife  of  Mahalalel,  iv. 

15 
Dothan,  xxix.  14;    xxxix.  10 
Dreams,  xxvii.  1;  xxix.  3,  6; 

xxxii.;     xxxv.     '>;     xliv. 

2  f. 

Earth,  the,  divided,  viii.  8 
Eating  with  Gentiles  forbid- 
den, xxii.  16 
Kber,  viii.  7 

Eden,   Garden  of,   ii.   7;     iv. 
26;    viii.  16,  it),  2\ 
land  of,  viii.  1 6,  21 
'Edna,  wife  of  Methuselah,  iv. 

27 
wife  of  Tcrah,  xi.  14 
Edom,  xxiv.    6;     xxxvi.     i<>; 
xxxviii.  8 


Edom,  kings  of,  xxxviii.   16- 

23 
made   tributary  to   Israel, 

xxxviii.  10-14 
Edrei,  xxix.  10 
Ehi,  xliv.  25 
Ela,  mountains  of,  ix.  2 
Elam,  son  of  Shcm,  vii.    18; 

ix.  2 
land  of,  viii.  21  ;    xiii.  22 
'Elcw,  city  of  (=  Hcliopolis), 

xxxiv.  11 
Eliezcr,  xiv.  2 
'Eljo,  vii.  22 
Elon,  xliv.  17 
'Emazara,  wife  of  Noah,:  iv. 

33 
Enoch  (a)  son  of  Cain,  iv.  9 

(b)  son  of  fared,  iv.  16-26; 
xix.  i,\,  27 

first  to   learn   writing,    iv. 

l7 

the  scribe  of  judgment  in 

the  Garden  of  Eden,  iv. 
23-24;    x.  17 

(c)  son  of  Kcuben,  xxxviii. 
8;    xliv.  12 

Enos,    son    of   Scth,    iv.    11; 

xix,   24. 
Ephraim,  xliv.  24 
Ephrath,  xxxii.  34 
Ephron  the  Hittitc,  xxxvi.  2 
Er,  xli.  1 
Eri,  xliv.  20 
'Ermon  (  =  Heroonpolis),  xlvi. 

6 
Esau,  xv.  30;    xix.  13;    xxix. 

13 
soils    his    birthright,    xxiv. 

breaks  with  Jacob,  xxxvii. 

20-23 
slain  by  Jacob,  xxxviii.  2 
Eschatology  of  Jubilees,  pp. 

xxviii  f. 
Eschatological     element      in 
Jubilees,     xxiii.      18-25, 

2(>-32 

Eschol,  xiii.  29 
Euphrates,  ix.  5;    xiv.  18 


218 


INDEX 


Eve,  created  on  the  sixth  day 
of  the  second  week,  iii. 

5-6 
brought  into  Eden  eighty 
days  after  her  creation, 
iii.  o 

Exposure  of  the  person  con- 
demned, iii.  31 ;    vii.  20 

Eyes,    closing    of    at    death, 
xxiii.  1  and  note;   xliv.  6 

Ezbon,  xliv.  20 

Falashas   (Abyssinian   Jews), 
customs   of   referred   to, 
pp.  xix,  xxxii 
Fara.  (=  Africa?),  viii.  27 
Feast   of   Tabernacles,    insti- 
tuted by  Abraham,  xvi. 
20-31 
celebrated  by  Jacob,  xxxii. 

4-9 
peculiar     features     in     our 

author's    description    of, 

pp.  xx  f. 
Feast  of  Weeks,  date  of,  pp. 

xviii  f. 
celebrated   in   heaven   and 

first   revealed    to    Noah, 

vi.    17-18;    xv.    i;    xxii. 

1-5 
rules  as  to  observance  of, 

vi.  20-22 
Feasts  of  the. new  moons,  vi. 

23-29  ' 
Fingers    placed    on    eyes    at 

death,  see  Eyes 
Fire,    burning   with,  xxx.  7; 

xli.  17  and  note. 
Flood,  the,  v.  23-32 
Flood-gates,  the,  v.  24 
Fornication,  punishment  for 

xx.  4;    xxv.  7;    xxxix.  6 
Four  sacred  places,  iv.  26 
Friend  of  God  (title  of  Abra- 
ham), xix.  9;   xxx.  20,  21 
Fruit-trees,     law     regarding, 

vii.  36 

Ga'as  (=  Gaash),  xxxiv.  4,  7 
Gad,  xxviii.  20;    xliv.  19,  20 


Gadir  (=  Cadiz),  viii.  23,  26; 

ix.  12 
Gera,  xliv.  25 
Gerar,  mountains  of,  xvi.  10; 

xxiv.  12,  19 
Gershon,  xliv.  14 
Giants,  the,  vii.  22 
Gihon,  the,  viii.  15,  22 
Gilead,  xxix.  4,  5,  6 

called  "  land  of  Rephaim," 

xxix.  9 
Girgashites,  the,  xiv.  18 
God,  dwells  with  man  in  the 

Messianic  Age,  i.  26  f. 
the  Father  of  the  children 

of    Jacob,  i.  24,    28;    see 

also  "  All  (God  of)  " 
Gog,  land  of,  viii.  25 
Gomer,  vii.  19 ;    ix.  8 
Graves,  eating  at,  xxii.  17 
Great  Sea,  the,  ix.  6 
Guni,  xliv.  30. 
Guardian-angel,  see  Angel 

Hagar,  xiv.  22;    xvii.  2;  xix. 

11 
Haggi,  xliv.  20 
Ham,  iv.  33;  vii.  8,  13;  xxii, 
21 
portion  of,  viii.  22-24 
Hamath,  x.  33;    xiii.  2 
Hamor,  xxx.  2 
Haran,    brother    of    Abram, 
xii.  10,  14 
land  of,  xiii.    1  ;    xxvii.   3, 
19;    xxxv.  10,  12 
Hasid     (Hasidim),    party    of 
the  "  pious,"  pp.  xxix  f. 
rise  of,  described,  xxiii.  16 
and  note 
Hazor,  xxxiv.  4,  7 
Heap  of  Witness,  xxix.  8 
Heavenly   tables,  the,  iii.    10 

note 
Hebrew  the  original  language 
of  men  and  animals,  iii. 
28  note 
forgotten  from  overthrow 
of  Babel  till  Abram's 
time,  xii.  25-26 


INDEX 


219 


Hebrew,  original  language  of 

Jubilees,  pp.  xii  £. 
Hebron,  xiii.  10,  21 ;    xix.  1 ; 

xxxvi.  20 
Heliopolis,  xl.  10 
Hermon,  xxix.  10 
Heth,  children  of,  xix.  4,  5 
Hezron,  xliv.  12 
Hivites,  xiv.  18 
Horites,  xxxvii.  10;    xxxviii. 

8 
House  (=  family),  xxii.  24 
Huppim,  xliv.  25 
Hushim,  xliv.  28 
Hyrcanus,    John,    pp.   xxiv, 

xxxiii 

Idolatry,  rise  of,  xi.  4 

Abram     dissuades     Terah 
from  practising,  xii.  7-8 
forbidden,    xx.    7-9;     xxi. 
3-5;  cf.  xxii.  17 
Idols,  destroyed,  xxxi.  2 
'tjaka,  xliv.  28 
'Ijaska,  xi.  9 
Immortality  of  the  soul,  xxiii. 

31 
not  denied    by  some  Sad- 
ducees,  p.  xxiii 
Imnah,  xliv.  21 
Incest,  laws  regarding,  xxxiii. 

10-20;   xii.  25  f. 
India,  viii.  21 ;   ix.  2,  3 
Inheritance,      Israel     God's, 

xxii.  9,  10,  15 
Inspiration,   xxxii.     25    and 

note 
Intercalary  days,  pp.  xviii  f. ; 

vi.  23  and  note 
Intermarriage    with   Canaan 
forbidden,   xx.    4;     xxii. 
20;    xxv.  1,  5 
with   Gentiles  =  giving   to 
Moloch,   xxx.    7-17   and 
notes. 
Isaac,  xv.  21 ;    xvi.  13 
sacrifice  of,  xviii.   1— 13 
blesses  Jacob,  xxvi.  22  ff. ; 

xxvii.  9  ff. 
blesses  Levi,  xxxi.  4-17 


Isaac,   blesses    Judah,   xxxi. 

18-22 
death  of,  xxxvi.  18 
Ishbak,  xix.  12 
Ishmael,  xiv.  24;   xv.  18,  20, 

23,  30;    xvii.  2,  4;    xx. 

1.  11 
Ishmaclites,  xx.  13 
Ishvah,  xliv.  21 
Ishvi,  xliv.  21 

Israel,   apostasy    of,   i.   5-9; 
xv.  33-34;   xxi".  14.  17- 
19 
captivity  of,  i.  10 
God's  inheritance,  xxii.  9, 

10,  15 
God's  portion,  xv.  31 ;  xvi. 

18 
separation    of    from    Gen- 
tiles, see  "  Eating"  and 
"  Intermarriage  " 
Issachar,  xxviii.  22 
*lv,  xliv.  30 

Jabbok,  xxix.  13,  14 
Jachin,  xliv.  13 
Jacob,  birth  of,  xix.  13 
twenty-second  from  Adam, 

ii.  23  and  note 
called  Israel,  xxxii.  17 
twelve  sons  of,  xxxiii.  22 
sees    the     future    on    the 
heavenly    tables,    xxxii. 
21-26 
gives   his   books   to    Levi, 

xiv.   16 
dies,  xiv.  14 
Jahleel,  xliv.  17 
Jahziel,  xliv.  30 
Jamin,  xliv.  13 
Japheth,  iv.  33;    vii.  9,   12, 

15;    »x.  7 
portion  of,  viii.  25-29 
Jared,  iv.  15 
Jasub,  xliv.  16 
J  a  van,  vii.  19;   ix.  10 
Jcbusitcs,  xiv.  18 
Jemuel,  xliv.  13 
Jerusalem,  i.  28,  29 
Jezer,  xliv.  30 


220 


INDEX 


Jochebed,  xliv.  8 
Jokshan,  xix.  12 
Jordan,  the,  xxix.  14 
Joseph,  xxviii.  24 

carried   down  into   Egypt, 

xxxiv.  11-21 
dies,  xlvi.  3 
Jubilee-period  =   49     years, 
according  to  our  author, 
p.  xvi 
laws  regarding,  1.  1-5 
Jubilees,  Book  of 

various  titles  of,  pp.  ix  f. 
written        originally        in 

Hebrew,  pp.  xii  f. 
Versions  of,  pp.  x  f. 
relation    of     to     Book    of 

Enoch,  pp.  xiii  f. 
relation    of    to   Test.    XII 

Patriarchs,  p.  xiv 
relation  of  to  later  Jewish 
Midrashic.    works,     pp. 
xiv  f. 
written   by  Moses    at  the 
dictation  of  an  angel,  i. 
26;    xxiii.  32 
object  of,  pp.  xv  ft. 
author     of,     probably     a 
Sadducean    priest,     pp. 
xxix  ff . 
author  of,  an    upholder  of 
the  Maccabean  dynasty, 
p.  xxx 
date  of,  pp.  xxxii  f. 
glorifies       patriarchs,       p. 
xxvii 
Judah  born,  xxviii.  15 
Judah,  tribe  of,  carried  into 
captivity,  i.  13 
restored  from  the  captivity, 
i.  15-16 
Judas  Maccabaeus,  p.  xxvi 
Judgment,  final  (of  the  fallen 
angels   and   their   sons), 

v.   IO-II 

doubtful  allusion  to  a,  pp. 
xxviii  f. ;    xxiii.  30  f.. 

Kaber,  brother  of  Reu,  xi.  7 
Kabratan,  xxxii.  32 


Kadesh,  xvi.  10 

Kadmonites,  xiv.  18 

Kaftur,  viii.  21 

Kainam,  viii.  1-4 

Kamaturi,  ix.  13 

Karaite    Jews,    customs    of, 

referred     to,     pp.     xxi, 

xxxii ;  212 
Karaso      (=  Chersonese      or 

Rhinocurura),  viii.  13 
Karnaim,  xxix.  10 
Kenan,  iv.  13 
Kenites,  xiv.  18 
Kenizzites,  xiv.  18 
K6s6d,  brother  of  Arpachsad, 

viii.  6 
grandfather    of    'CJra,    the 

wife  of  Reu,  xi.   1 
Keturah,  xix.  11;    xx.  1,  11, 

12 
identified   with    Hagar    in 

later    Jewish    tradition, 

p.  113  note 
Kirjath  Arba,  xix.  1 
Kittim  =  Macedonians,  xxiv. 

28,  29;  cf.  xxxvii.  10 
Kohath,  xliv.  14 

Laban,  xix.  10;    xxvii.  3,  10; 

xxviii.  1 
Lamech,  iv.  27 
Land     to    lie    fallow    every 

seventh  year,  vii.  37 
Law,     the,     given   •through 

angels,  i.  27 
transmitted    through    the 

patriarchs,  vii.  38 
Leah,  xxviii.  3 

death  of,  xxxvii.  21 
Lebanon,  viii.  21;    ix.  4;  xii. 

15 
Levi,  birth  of,  xxviii.  14 

ordained  to  the  priesthood 
for  the  destruction  of 
Shechem,  xxx.  17-23 

ordained  to  the  priest- 
hood because  he  was  the 
tenth  son,  xxxii.  2 

pre-eminence  of,  over 
Judah,  xxxi.   14-17 


INDEX 


221 


Lex  Talionis,  pp.  xxi  f.  ;   iv. 

31;    xlviii.  14  anil  note; 

cf.  vii.  33 
Lomna,  wife  of  Pcicg,  x.  18 
Lot,  xii.  30;    xiii.  1  ,    xvi.  7. 
LubAr,  v.  26 ;    vii     1 
Lud,  vii.  18 ;    ix.  f>,  io,  1  r 
Luz,  xxvii.  19,  20 

Ma'anisakir       (corrupt       tor 

Shakir     of     Mahanaim), 

xxxiv.  4,  7 
Maccabcan    victories,    scenes 

of,  alluded  to,  xxiii.  21- 

22 
Madai,  vii.    19;     viii.   5;     ix. 

9 

obtains  Media,  x.  35-36 
Macdai    (=  Media),   viii.   21 
MagdalAdrA'ef,  xxxiii.  1 
Magog,  vii.  19 ;    ix.  8 
Mahalalel,  iv.  14,  15;  xix.  24 
Mahalath,  xxix.    18 
MAkamAron,  xlvi.  0 
Mamre  (a  person),  xiii.  29 

(a  place),  xiv.  10;    xvi.  1 
Manasseh,  xliv.  24 
Marriage  with   sisters  ceases 
in  Mahalalcl's  time,   iv. 

15 
(one  man  with  two  sisters), 

xxviii.  8  ft 
elder  sister  precedes  youn- 
ger, xxviii.  6  ff. 
mixed,  p.  154  note  (xxx.  7) 
Mastema,    x.    8;     xi.    5,    11; 
xix.  28 
=  Satan,  x.  8,   11 
prince   or   chief,    xvii.    16; 

xlviii.   2 
prince  of  the,  xviii.  9,  12; 
xlviii.  9,   12,   15 
Ma'uk,  sea  of,  viii.  22,  26 
Me'at    (=  Maeotis),   viii.    12, 

27 ;    ix.  8 
Mebri,  mountains  of,  ix.  2 
Medan,  xix.  12 
Mclchizcdck,  xiii.  25 
Melka,  wife  of  Levi,  xxxiv.  20 
wife  of  KA.inA.in,  viii.   5 


Melka,  wife  of  Nahor,  xix.  10 

wife  of  Serug,  xi.  7 
Mcrari,  xliv.  14 
Mcshcch,  vii.  19;    ix.  12 
Mesopotamia,    ix.    5;     xxvii. 

10,   12,   13;    xxix.    18 

Messiah  from  Judah,  xxxi.  18 

Messianic    kingdom,    gradual 

development    of    the,    i. 

29;    v.  12;    xxiii.  26-30 

righteous  do   not   share  in 

the,  xxiii.  30,  31 
woes,   xxiii.   9,    11-15,    17- 
19,   22-25 
Methuselah,  iv.  27 
Midian,  xix.  12 
Misur,  xxix.  10 
Mizraim,  vii.   13;    ix.   1 
Moab,  xxxvii.  6,  10;    xxxviii. 

6 
Moloch,  xxx.  10 
Moon,    polemic    against    cal- 
culations by  the,  vi.  36 
Moses  born,  xlvii.  1 

twenty-one  years  at  court 

of  l'haraoh,  xlvii.  10 
thirty-six  years  in  Midian, 
xlviii.   1 
Most  High,  the,  xxxvi.  i(> 
Mount  of  the  Last,  iv.  10 
Mu'ak,  wife  of  Shelah,  viii.  6 
Mualeleth,  wife  of  Kenan,  iv. 

14 
Muppim,  xliv.  25 

Naaman,  xliv.  25 

Nahor,  father  of  Terah,  xi.  8 

son  of  Terah,  xii.  11 
Name    (of    God),    xxiii.    21; 

xxx.  15  ;    xxxvii.  7 
NAphidim,  vii.  21 
Naphil,  vii.  22 
Naphtali,  xxviii.  19;   xliv.  30 
Navel  of  the  earth,  viii.  19 
Ncbaioth,  xvii.  14 
Nebrod,  viii.  7 
NeclAtamA'uk,  vii.  14,  17 
NestAg,  xi.  9 

Ni'imAn,    wife    of     Zabulon, 
xxxiv.  -20 


222 


INDEX 


Nineveh,  ix.   3 

Noah,   iv.    28;     xix.    24,    27; 
xxii.   13 
ordinances  of,  vii.  20-39 
Noam,  wife  of  Enos,  iv.  13 

Ohad,  xliv.   13 

Old    age,    troubles    of,    xxiii. 

1  2  if. 
Onan,  xliv.  4,  5 
'Ora,  wife  of  Reu,  xi.  1 

Pallu,.  xliv.   12 

Paran,    wilderness    of,    xvii. 

1  2  ;    xx.  12 
Paronomasiae,  iv.  9,  15,  28; 

viii.  5,  8;   x.    18,  26;   xi. 

6,    12 
Peleg,  viii.  8 ;    x.  18 
Pentateuch,  the  book  of  the 

first     Law     written     by 

an  angel,   i.   27 ;    vi.   22 ; 

xxx.  12,  21 
Perez,  xli.  21  ;    xliv.  15 
Perizzites,  xiv.  18;  xxx.  25 
Phakorites,  xiv.   18 
Pharaoh,     contemporary     of 

Abram,  xiii.   13 
contemporary    of    Joseph, 

xl.  1,  3,  5,  etc. 
contemporary     of     Moses, 

xlvii.   2 
Pharnak,  ix.  2 
Phicol,  xxiv.  26 
lJhilistia,  xxxvii.  6,   10 
Philistines,  xxiv.  14,  15,  etc. 
Phua,  xliv.  16 
Pithom,  xlvi.  14 
Plagues,  the  ten,  xlviii.  5-1 1 
Plant,  the,  of  uprightness,  i. 

16;     xvi.    26;     xxi.    24; 

xxxvi.  6 
Plough,  the  invention  of  the, 

xi.   23-24 
Potiphar,  chief  of  the  cooks, 

xxxiv.  11  ;    xxxix.  2 
Priest  of  the  Most  High  God, 

xxxii.  1 
Purification,  laws  of,  iii.  10-12 
Put,  vii.  13 ;    ix.  f 


Qafratfcf,  xxxiv.  15 
Qelt  (=  Celts),  viii.   z(> 

Kaamses,  xiv.  6;    xlvi.  14 
Kachel,  xxviii.  1,9;  xxxii.  34 
Rafa      (.      Rhipaean     Moun- 
tains) viii.  12,   16 
Rake'el,  brother  of  Lamech, 

iv.  33 
Rasu'eja,  wife  of  Arpachshad, 

viii.  1 
Rasujal,  iv.  16 
Rasu'u,     wife     of     Naphtali, 

xxxiv.   20 
Ravens     put     to     flight     by 

Abram,  xi.   18-22 
Rebecca,    xix.     10,     13,     16; 

xxxv.  27 
blesses  God,  xxv.  18  ff. 
blesses  Jacob,  xxv.  15  fi. 
Red  Sea,  the,  viii.  21  ;  ix.  2,  4 
Rephaim,  the,  xiv.  18;    xxix. 

9 
Resurrection,  no,  of  the  body, 

xxiii.  30 
Retaliation,  see  Lex  Talionis 
Reu,  x.  18 
Reuben,  xxviii.  11 

sin  of,  with  Bilhah,   xxiii. 

i-9 
R6bel    (corrupt    for    Arbael), 

xxxiv.  8 
Rosh,  xliv.  25 

Sabbath,  the,  to  be  kept  by 

the   highest   angels   and 

Israel,  ii.  17-21,  31 

not  for  the  inferior  angels, 

nor  for  the  Gentiles,  ii. 

2,  31 
first  celebrated   by   Jacob, 

ii.  23,  31 
laws  for  the  observance  of 

the,  i.  6-13 ;   ii.  25-30 
various   interpretations   of 

the  term,  in  relation  to 

the  feast  of  the  weeks, 

xv.   i 
Sacrifices  to  the  dead,  xxii.  17 
to  demons,  i.  11;    xxii.  17 


INDEX 


423 


Sadducees,  pp.    xxi,  xxx  ff. ; 

209  note 
Salem,  city  of,  xxx    1 
Sallum,  xliv.  28 
Salt  Sea,  xiii.  22 
Salt,  to  be  used  in  sacrifices, 

xxi.  n 
Samaritans,   customs   of    re- 
ferred   to,    vii.    36    and 

note;    xv.     14 ;     p.     200 

note 
Samon,  xliv.  28 
Sanir  (=  Biblical  Scnir),  viii. 

21  ;    ix.  4 
Sarai,  xii.  9 

called  Sarah,  xv.   15 
death  of,  xix.  2,  7 
Satan,  x.  1 1 

to  be  punished  finally,  x.  8 
confined        at        different 

periods,  xxiii.  29;    xl.  9; 

xlvi.  2  ;    I.5 
absence   of,    xxiii.    29;    xl. 

10;    xlvii.  2 ;    I.5 
substituted        for        direct 

divine  agency,  xvii.   16; 

xlviii.  2,  17;    p.  205  note 
Seasons,  the,  xxxix.   16 
SedeqeTSlObab,  vii.   iO,   17 
Seir,  xxix.  13,  18 
Sellasar,  xiii.  22 
Selo  (—  Shiloh),  xxxiv.  4,  7 
Sephantiphans,  xl.   10 
Seragan    (=  Saltan),    xxxiv. 

4.  7 
Serah,  xliv.   21 
Sered,  xliv.   17 
S6roh,  xi.   1,  6 
Serug,  xi.  6 
Seth,  iv.  17;    xix.  24 
Shallum,  xliv.  30 
Shaul,  xliv.  13 
Shechcm;  city  of,  xiii.  1 
destroyed     by     Levi     and 

Simeon,  xxx.  4    <> 
taken    from    the    Amorites 

by    Jacob   and   his   sons. 

xxxiv.  2    8 
Shechem,     son     of     Hamor, 

XXX.    2 


Shelah,    son   of   Arpachshad, 

viii.  5,  6 
son  of  Judah.  xli.  6,  7 
Shem,  iv.  33;    vii.  9,  11,  12, 

16;   xix.  24,  27 
lot  of,  viii.  12-21 
Shcol,  a  place  of  punishment 

but  not  of  fire,   vii.   29; 

xxii.  22 ;    xxiv.  31 
Shimron,  xliv.   16 
Shinar,    land    of,    ix.    3;     x. 

18,  19,  20;    xiii.  22 
Shua,  xix.  12 
Shuni,  xliv.  20 
Shur,  xvi.   10 
Siddim,  xiii.  22 
Simeon,  xxviii.   13;    xxx.  4; 

xxxiv.  20,  21  ;    xliv.  13 
Sina'ar,      father-in-law      of 

Pcleg,  x.  18 
Sinai,  i.  2,  5 ;    viii.  19 
Six  days  of  creation,  ii    1— 14 
Sodom,  xiii.   17,  22;    xvi.   5; 

xx.  5,  6;    xxii.   22 
Son    of   God,    the   individual 

Israelite  a,  i.  24,  25,  28; 

xix.   29 
Spirit,  a  holy,  i.  21,  23 

of  righteousness  (or  truth), 

xxv.   14 
Sun,  the,  to  regulate  the  year, 

ii.  9  ;     vi.  36-38 

Tables,  two,  of  stone,  i.  1 
Tamar,  xli.  1,  6,  8,  i(>,  19 
Tamnatares         (—  Timnath- 

heres),  xxxiv.  8 
Tanais  (—  loan),  xiii.   12 
Taphu,  xxxiv.  4 
Temple,  the  second,  i.   17 
Terah,  xi.  10 
Tergal,  xiii.   22 
Tharmuth,  xlvii.  5 
Third  month,  i.   1 
Thousand   years  =  one   day, 

iv.  30 
Thousand  years  of  life  for  the 

righteous,   xxiii.    27    (iv. 

30;    xxiii.  15) 
Tigris,  ix.  2,  5 


224 


INDEX 


Timnah,  xli.  8,  9 

Tina  (=  Tanais  —  Don),  viii. 

12,  i6,  25,  28;    ix.  2,  8 
Tiras.  vii.  19;    ix.  13 
Tithes,  xiii.  25,  26;   xxxii.  2, 

8,  9,  10-15 
double,  xxxii.  9-1 1 
Tola,  xliv.  16 
Tubal,  vii.  19;   ix.  11 
Twenty-two — a       significant 

number,  ii.  23 

'Ur,    father-in-law    of     Reu, 

xi.  1 
Ur,  city  of,  xi.  3,  7,  8;    xii. 

Vision,  xxiv.  1 

Visions,  xxxii.  21 ;   xliv.  3  ff . ; 

xlv.  4 
Vows,  xxxi.  26  fi. 

War  forbidden  on  the  Sab- 
bath, i.  12 

Washings,  obligatory  in  con- 
nection with  sacrifices, 
xxi.  16 

Watchers,  the,  see  Angels 

Way  (=  religion),  xxiii.  21 


Weeks,  feast  of,  pp.  xviii  f . ; 
xxii.   1 

Well  of  the  Oath  {see  Beer- 
sheba),  xvi.  11,  15;  xviii. 
17;  xxii.  1;  xxiv.  21, 
26;  xxvii.  19;  xxix.  17; 
xliv.  1 

Wine,  to  be  drunk  at  the 
Passover,  xlix.  6,  9 

Wives  of  patriarchs,  xxxiv. 
20 ;  xli.  7 

Woods  to  be  used  in  sacrific- 
ing, xxi.  12-14 

Wreaths,  xvi.  30  and  note 
(cf.  pp.  xx.  f.) 

Year,    the,  =  364    days,    vi. 
29-38 
430,  from  birth  of  Isaac  to 
the  Exodus,  xiv.  13 

Zabulon,  xxviii.  23 
Zeboim,  xiii.  23;    xvi.  5 
Zephathite,  xliv.   13 
Zerah,  xli.  21 ;    xliv.  15 
Zilpah,     sister    of    Bilhah, 

jcxviii.  3,  9;    xliv.  19 
Zimram,  xix.  12 
Zion,  i.  28,  29;   viii.  19 
Ziphion,  xliv.  20 


Printed  in  Great  Rkitain  nv  Kichaku  Ci.ay  &  Sons,  Limited, 

BRUNSWICK  ST.,  STAMFORD  ST.,  S.B.  I,  AND  UUNGAY,  SUFFOLK. 


TRANSLATIONS     OF 
EARLY  DOCUMENTS 

A    Series   of    texts    important   for    the    study    of 
Christian  origins^  by  various  authors 


UNDER    THE    JOINT    EDITORSHIP    OF 

The  Rev.  W.  O.  E.  OESTERLEY,  D.D. 

AND 

The  Rev.  CANON  G.  H.  BOX,  M.A. 


THE  object  of  the  Series  is  to  provide  short, 
cheap,  and  handy  text-books  for  students, 
either  working  by  themselves  or  in  classes.  The 
aim  is  to  furnish  in  translations  important  texts 
unencumbered  by  commentary  or  elaborate  notes, 
which  can  be  had  in  larger  works. 


FIRST    SERIES 

Palestinian-Jewish   and  Cognate  vTexts 
(Prc-Rabbinic) 


1.  Aramaic  Papyri.     A.  E.  Cowley,  Litt.D.,  Sub- 

Librarian  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  Oxford. 

2.  The    Wisdom    of    Ben-Sira    (Ecclesiasticus). 

The  Rev.  W.  O.  E.  Oesterley,  D.D., 
Vicar  of  St.  Alban's,  Bedford  Park,  W.  ; 
Examining  Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of 
London. 

3.  The    Book   of    Enoch.      The    Rev.    R.    H. 

Charles,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Westminster. 

4.  The    Book  of   Jubilees.      The    Rev.   Canon 

Charles. 

5.  The  Testaments  of    the   Twelve    Patriarchs. 

The  Rev.  Canon  Charles. 

6.  The    Odes  and    Psalms  of    Solomon.      The 

Rev.  G.  H.  Box,  M.A.,  Hector  of  Sutton, 
Beds.,  Hon.  Canon  of  St.  Albans. 

7.  The  Ascension  of  Isaiah.     The  Rev.  Canon 

Charles. 

8.  The   Apocalypse   of   Ezra  (ii.  Esdras).     The 

Rev.  Canon  Box. 

9.  The  Apocalypse  of  Baruch.     The  Rev.  Canon 

Charles. 

10.  The  Apocalypse  of  Abraham.  The  Rev. 
Canon  Box. 

1  1.  The  Assumption  of  Moses.  The  Rev.  W.  J. 
Ferrar,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Holy  Trinity,  Fast 
Finchley. 


FIRST    SERIES— continued 

12.   The,  Biblical    Antiquities   of    Philo.      M.   R. 

James,     Litt.D.,     KB. A.,     Hon.     Litt.D., 

Dublin,  Hon.  LL.D.  St.  Andrews,  Provost 

of   King's  College,  Cambridge. 

Now  Ready— Nos.  2, 3, 5,8,7  and  10  (In  one  vol.),  9  and  II  (In  one 
vol.),  2s.  6d.  net  each ;  No.  4,  4s.  net ;  nnd  No.  12,  8s.  f>d.  net. 


SECOND    SERIES 
Hellenistic-Jewish   Texts 

i.   The    Wisdom    of    Solomon.       The    Rev.    Dr. 
Oesterley. 

2.  The    Sibylline    Oracles    (Books    iii— v).       The 

Rev.  H.  N.  Bate,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Christ 
Church,  Lancaster  Gate,  W.  ;  Examining 
Chaplain   to  the   Bishop  of  London. 

3.  The  Letter  of  Aristeas.     H.  St.  John  Thack- 

eray, M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge  ; 
Grinfield  Lecturer  in  the  Septuagint  in  the 
University  of  Oxford. 

4.  Selections  from  Philo.     J.  H.  A.  Hart,  B.D., 

Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge. 

5.  Selections     from      Josephus.        H.     St.     John 

Thackeray,   M.A. 

6.  The   Fourth   Book  of   Maccabees.      The   Rev. 

C.  W.  Emmet,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  West 
Hendred,  Berks. 

/Vow  Ready— Nos.  I  and  3,  2s.  6d.  net  each. 


THIRD    SERIES 

Palestinian-Jewish   and   Cognate  Texts 
(Rabbinic) 


*i.   Pirqe  Aboth.     The  Rev.  Dr.  Oesterley. 

*2=  Berakhoth.  The  Rev.  A.  Lukyn  Williams, 
D.D.,  Vicar  of  Guilden  Morden,  Hon. 
Canon  of  Ely. 

*3-  Yoma.     The  Rev.  Canon  Box. 

*4.   Megillath  Taanith.     The  Rev.  Canon  Box. 

Sanhedrin.     Rev.   H.   Danby,   Sub-Librarian 
St.  Deiniol's  Library,  Hawarden. 


#- 


6.  Tamid 

7.  Shabbath 

8.  Aboda  Zara 

9.  Middoth 
10.  Sopherim 


1 1 .  Megilla 

12.  Sukka 

13.  Taanith 

14.  Qimchi's         Com- 

mentary   on    the 
Psalms  (Book  i) 


*  It  is  proposed  to  publish  these  texts  first  by  way  of 
experiment.  If  the  Series  should  so  far  prove  successful  the 
others  will  follow. 


SOCIETY  FOR  PROMOTING  CHRISTIAN  KNOWLEDGE 

London:  68,  haymarkbt,  s.w.,   43,  queen  victoria  street,  b.c. 

Brighton:  129,  north  street 


AND    ALL    BOOKSELLERS 


[1.9.17 


PROPERTY  OF: 
DAVID  0.  McKAY  LIBRARY 

BYU-IDAHO 
REXB1^0^  ^160-0405 


